

ÔThose feminists who assume this book is not for them Ð give it a go. Brilliantly written, cleverly argued, packed with fascinating ideas and information: agree or disagree with the central premise, it is fresh and exciting.Õ 
Julie Bindel, feminist and writer, author of Feminism for Women ÔThis is a marvellously essential book, brilliantly argued. Perry has written the most radical feminist challenge to a failed liberal feminism. For love of womankind, and based on her profound reading of scientific, cultural and historical material, Perry has committed heresy; namely, she has dared argue that men and women really are different, especially sexually Ð and that the so-called sexual revolution failed women, especially young and poor women, and in a most spectacular way. Hook-up culture, or Òhaving sex like a manÓ, is hardly liberating for most girls and women. What Perry has to say about pornography, prostitution and the uber eroticization of culture is both true and heartbreaking Ð but she is, perhaps, at her best, her kindest, when she writes about feminism and motherhood, about what both children and older women need in order to survive and flourish. Brava for such good writing and for such bold common sense.Õ Phyllis Chesler, writer, feminist and psychologist, author of Women and Madness 
ÔBrilliantly conceived and written, this highly original book is an urgent call for a sexual counter-revolution. A book as stimulating as the splash of icy water that wakes someone from a nightmare.Õ 
Helen Joyce, author of Trans: When Ideology Meets Reality ÔPerry tackles the costs of the sexual revolution head-on. Wending her careful way through liberal narratives of progress and conservative hand-wringing over decline, Perry demonstrates that beginning with the priorities of women changes too how we must think about politics. Perry is a clearsighted and unflinching guide through all of the major areas of contemporary sexual politics, from dating to marriage and children, pornography, and violence against women. We live, she suggests, in an era of Òsexual disenchantmentÓ. What we need today is a new morality, a new set of virtues: the sexual revolution failed, but women and children were the greater losers. This is a brave and unflinching book: we have it in us to treat each other once more with dignity, Perry suggests. The partyÕs over Ð long live love, virtue, commitment and kindness.Õ Nina Power, author of What Do Men Want? ÔFor a generation now, we have been sold the lie that feminism means celebrating Òsex workÓ, violent pornography and casual hook.ups. To feel otherwise brands a woman not just as uncool and uptight but as an enemy of social justice. How the hell did the misogynist global sex trade manage to enlist feminism as head cheerleader? Enter the laser intellect of Louise Perry, who, in this thoughtful, timely and witty book, exposes the travesty of Òsex positiveÓ feminism as neither positive nor sexy and argues for new thinking that puts womenÕs true interests, desires and happiness at its heart.Õ Janice Turner, Times columnist and feature writer 
Dedication 
For the women who learned it the hard way 
The Case Against the Sexual 
Revolution 

A New Guide to Sex in the 21st Century 
LOUISE PERRY 
polity 
Copyright © Louise Perry 2022 
The right of Louise Perry to be identified as Author of this Work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. First published in 2022 by Polity Press 
Polity Press 65 Bridge Street Cambridge CB2 1UR, UK 
Polity Press 101 Station Landing Suite 300 Medford, MA 02155, USA 
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short passages for the purpose of criticism and review, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publisher. 
ISBN-13: 978-1-5095-5000-5 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. Library of Congress Control Number: 2021953231 
The publisher has used its best endeavours to ensure that the URLs for external websites referred to in this book are correct and active at the time of going to press. However, the publisher has no responsibility for the websites and can make no guarantee that a site will remain live or that the content is or will remain appropriate. 
Every effort has been made to trace all copyright holders, but if any have been overlooked the publisher will be pleased to include any necessary credits in any subsequent reprint or edition. 
For further information on Polity, visit our website: 
politybooks.com 


Acknowledgements 
I owe enormous thanks to my agent, Matthew Hamilton, and my editor, George Owers, without whom this book would never have been written. I am also indebted to the many people who read and commented on various proposals and drafts: Julie Bindel, Diana Fleischman, David Goodhart, Camille Guillot, Jessica Masterson, Dina McMillan, Nina Power, Katharina Rietzler, Rajiv Shah, Kathleen Stock and Randy Thornhill. I owe particular thanks to the brilliant Mary Harrington, who provided constant support and ideas, and to my other ÔreactionaryÕ feminist friends: Alex Kaschuta, Katherine Dee, Helen Roy and Mason Hartman. I am eternally grateful to Fiona MacKenzie, my friend and colleague, who founded We CanÕt Consent to This. And I owe thanks also to Eve and Max for sticking by me, despite my terrible opinions Ð I really do appreciate it. 
I depend, as ever, on the love and companionship of my husband and family, including my beloved son, who was born during the writing of this book, and my most faithful reader, my mum, who has read every word IÕve ever published. 
The little respect paid to chastity in the male world is, I am persuaded, the grand source of many of the physical and moral evils that torment mankind, as well as of the vices and follies that degrade and destroy women. 
Mary Wollstonecraft, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman 
he said theyÕd found a brothel 
on the dig he did last night 
I asked him how they know 
he sighed: 
a pit of babiesÕ bones 
a pit of newborn babiesÕ bones was how to spot a brothel 
Hollie McNish, ÔConversation with an archeologistÕ 


Foreword 
by Kathleen Stock 
What did the sexual revolution of the 1960s ever do for us? In this brilliant book, Louise Perry argues that it depends which ÔusÕ youÕre talking about. The invention of the contraceptive pill reduced womenÕs fear of unwanted pregnancy, enabling them to provide the kind of sex a lot of men prefer: copious and commitment-free. Many women claim to enjoy this kind of sex too. But, as Perry explains, thereÕs good reason to disbelieve at least some such reports. For we now live in a culture where, though it isnÕt taboo for a man to choke a woman during sex, or anally penetrate her, or ejaculate on her face while filming it, it is taboo for a young woman to express discomfort about the nature of the sexual bargain sheÕs expected by society to make. This bargain says: sacrifice your own wellbeing for the pleasures of men in order to compete in the heterosexual dating marketplace at all. 
As Perry documents in sometimes shocking vignettes, whatever ill effects the sexual revolution had for women in the twentieth century have been supersized in the digital age of the twenty-first. There is little doubt that contemporary sexual culture is destructive for younger women in particular. It sells them a sexbot aesthetic, pressures them into promiscuity, bombards them with dick pics and violent pornography, and tells them to enjoy being humiliated and assaulted in bed. It says that, as long as they choose it, being exploited for money is Ôsex workÕ and that Ôsex work is workÕ. It also tells women not to mix up sex with love and to stay disconnected and emotionless from partners. It encourages them to change their bodies in ways that match pornographic ideals. And, worst of all, it says that to comply with all of this is empowering Ð ignoring the obvious fact that telling women to subdue their minds and submit their bodies to physically stronger strangers can be lethal. 
Perhaps surprisingly, the taboo around discussing the costs of the sexual revolution is enabled by popular feminism. This is because popular feminism is a version of liberal feminism, and liberal feminism in its populist guise is focused mostly on a womanÕs Ôright to chooseÕ or ÔconsentÕ, construed incredibly thinly. Everything and anything goes as long as you choose or consent to it at the time. What this misses out, of course, is that people can be pressured Ð by peers or partners or wider cultural forces Ð into believing that they want things which later they come to recognise as bad for them. In a culture dominated by male sexuality, thereÕs an obvious interest in convincing women that they want to have sex like men do, and many women go along with things they later come to regret. 
At this point, the inner liberal feminist in many readers may be howling: but what if I genuinely want all that stuff? Well, good for you if you genuinely do. But, as Perry shows, even if this sort of sex works for some women, there are many other women for whom it does not. And they arenÕt ÔprudesÕ, or ÔfrigidÕ, or ÔasexualÕ, or Ôin a moral panicÕ, or any of the other insulting words produced by the culture to keep the whole man-pleasing machinery working. Nor need they be religious. There are plenty of reasons to be wary of 
contemporary sexual mores that are perfectly secular. Both liberal feminismÕs narrow focus on choice and its incapacity to discuss deep differences between women and men stem from its intellectual forefather: liberalism, a political tradition heavily focused on freedom of choice as the thing definitive of personhood. The fantasy of a liberal subject is of an ostensibly sexless individual, defined mostly by the presence of a free will, untethered by family ties or community expectations and pursuing private preferences in a relatively unfettered way. I say Ôostensibly sexlessÕ, because Ð in a point made by second-wave feminists and brought up to date by Perry Ð this idealised figure of a liberal subject sounds more like a man roaming around getting his oats than a woman whose life is intertwined with the kids that are the outcome of her own sexual activity. 
How then can we start talking about what might work for women, specifically? Perry turns to biology and evolutionary psychology, asking: What does a woman tend to desire, given the kind of female animal she is, with the specific reproductive capacities she tends to have? (Talk of animals is not insulting. We are all animals, though hubris tries to make us forget it.) Given the vexed history of discussion about nature vs nurture within feminism, this move towards the natural is a bold one. But PerryÕs approach deserves open-minded attention Ð especially when you remember that, according to the currently more popular narrative, human bodies as well as minds are plastic. Yes: such is liberal feminismÕs fear of limits upon personal freedom that Ð in tandem with its BFF capitalism Ð it now construes facts about healthy bodies as obstacles to freedom. DonÕt like your breasts? Buy new ones, or cut them off altogether! (Delete as appropriate.) Incredibly, in some feminists, the degree of denial stretches even to telling us that biology itself is a myth or a construct. Yet, as Perry argues, once we acknowledge the Ôhard limits imposed by biologyÕ, we can make informed inferences about female wellbeing in particular Ð rooted in the real, and not what is projected or fantasised by men. 
PerryÕs background as a journalist, commentator, and campaigner against Ôrough sexÕ criminal defences perfectly places her to tackle these issues, and she does so with characteristic style and fearlessness. Her book does several things that are unusual for a modern feminist text. It refuses the easy wins of the Cool Girl Feminist, swimming against the pink tide of sex-positive vacuity to spell out some uncomfortable truths. It is uninterested in liberal feminist buzzwords such as freedom and equality, focusing instead on womenÕs needs and wellbeing, independently from a consideration of men. Whether you ultimately agree or disagree with PerryÕs analysis, the book takes the interests of women deadly seriously and carves out a space for them to talk properly about the costs of the sexual culture in which they must sink or swim. ItÕs essential for the wellbeing of young women that we do this, and we should all be grateful to Perry for advancing this important conversation. 

Sex Must Be Taken Seriously 
Hugh Hefner and Marilyn Monroe Ð those two icons of the sexual revolution Ð never actually met, but they were born in the same year and laid to rest in the same place, side by side.1 
In 1992, Hefner bought the crypt next door to MonroeÕs in the Westwood Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles for $75,000,2 
telling the Los Angeles Times: ÔIÕm a believer in things symbolic É [so] spending eternity next to Marilyn is too sweet to pass up.Õ3 
At the age of ninety-one, Hefner got his wish. The long-dead Monroe had no say in the matter. But then she had never been given much say in what men did to her over the course of her short life. 
Marilyn Monroe was both the first ever cover star and the first ever naked centrefold in the first ever edition of HefnerÕs Playboy magazine, published in December 1953. ÔEntertainment for MENÕ was the promise offered on the front cover, and the magazine evidently delivered on that promise, since it was a commercial success from its very first issue. 
Marilyn MonroeÕs naked photos were four years old by the time of their publication. In 1949, the 23-year-old Monroe had been paid $50 for a two-hour photo shoot with pin-up photographer Tom Kelley, who had promised that heÕd make her unrecognisable, and almost delivered on his promise.4 
The woman curled up on a red velvet bedspread is not obviously Monroe, since her hair was a little more brunette at the time, her pained face was half hidden behind an outstretched arm, and her pale, pretty body was indistinguishable from the bodies of most of the other models in Playboy (which would not feature a black centrefold until 1965 Ð the eighteen-year-old recipient of this dubious honour, Jennifer Jackson, later described ÔHefÕ as Ôa high-class pimpÕ).5 

The clothed Monroe on the cover of the magazine beckoned in readers with the promise of a ÔFULL COLORÕ nude photo of the actress for the Ôfirst time in any magazineÕ, and Hefner later said that her centrefold was the key reason for the publicationÕs initial success. Monroe herself was humiliated by the photo shoot, which she resorted to only out of desperate need for money, signing the release documents with a fake name.6 
Hefner didnÕt pay her to use her images and didnÕt seek her consent before publishing them.7 
Monroe reportedly told a friend that she had Ônever even received a thank-you from all those who made millions off a nude Marilyn photograph. I even had to buy a copy of the magazine to see myself in it.Õ8 

The courses of these two lives show us in perfect vignette the nature of the sexual revolutionÕs impact on men and women. Monroe and Hefner both began in obscurity and ended their lives rich and famous, having found success in the same city and at the very same historical moment. But, while Hefner lived a long, grubby life in his mansion with his playmates, MonroeÕs life was cut short by misery and substance abuse. As the radical feminist Andrea Dworkin later 

wrote: She grinned, she posed, she pretended, she had affairs with famous and powerful men. A friend of hers claimed that she had so many illegal abortions wrongly performed that her reproductive organs were severely injured. She died alone, possibly acting on her own behalf for the first time É Her lovers in both flesh and fantasy had fucked her to death, and her apparent suicide stood at once as accusation and answer: no, Marilyn Monroe, the ideal sexual female, had not liked it.9 

MonroeÕs life followed a similar trajectory to that of her pin-up predecessor Bettie Page, who survived into old age but spent her final decades in a psychiatric institution. So too the pop star Britney Spears, who at the age of sixteen gyrated in a school uniform and begged viewers to Ôhit me baby one more timeÕ. Spears has since suffered a protracted and very public nervous breakdown, just like the countless other Monroes Ð some of whom we will meet over the course of this book Ð who have been destroyed in much the same way as the original icon. 
In particular, todayÕs female porn performers Ð the most successful of whom now inhabit much the same cultural space that Monroe inhabited in her day Ð are far more likely than their peers to have been sexually abused as children, to have been in foster care, and to have been victims of domestic violence as adults10 
Ð all misfortunes that Monroe suffered too.11 
The libidinous public asks a lot of the women it desires. And when it all goes horribly wrong, as it usually does, this public labels these once-desired women ÔcrazyÕ and moves on. There is never a reckoning with what sexual liberation does to those women who follow its directives most obediently. 
Hugh Hefner experienced Ôsexual liberationÕ very differently from Monroe, as men typically do, although his example is no more worthy of emulation. As a younger man, he was the true playboy Ð handsome, charming and envied by other men. He lived the fantasy of a particularly immature adolescent boy, hosting parties for his celebrity friends in a garish ÔgrottoÕ and then retiring upstairs with his harem of identical twenty-something blondes. He supposedly once said that his best pick-up line was simply the sentence ÔHi, my name is Hugh Hefner.Õ12 

Unlike Monroe, Hefner lived to grow old and, as he did so, lost much of his glitter. By the end of his life, he was more often publicly portrayed as a pathetic figure, and various former playmates provided the press with unflattering accounts of life in the Playboy mansion. Jill Ann Spaulding, for instance, wrote of the elderly HefnerÕs uninspiring sexual performance: ÔHef just lies there with his Viagra erection. ItÕs just a fake erection, and each girl gets on top of him for two minutes while the girls in the background try to keep him excited. TheyÕll yell things like, ÒFuck her daddy, fuck her daddy!ÓÕ13 

Other women spoke of soiled mattresses, a bizarre playmate uniform of matching pink flannel pyjamas, and carpets covered with dog faeces.14 
It was revealed that Hefner took an obsessive and coercive attitude towards his many girlfriends, dictating how they wore their hair and make-up, keeping a detailed log of all his sexual encounters,15 
and becoming angry if refused sex.16 
His acolytes forgave ÔHefÕ when he was still young and attractive, but as time went on he was revealed to be little more than a dirty old man. The glamour of the playboy Ð or the ÔfuckboyÕ, in modern slang Ð doesnÕt last forever. 

HefnerÕs reputation may have diminished over time, but he never experienced any guilt for the harm he perpetrated. Asked at the age of eighty-three by the New York Times if he regretted any of the Ôdark consequencesÕ of the Playboy revolution he set in motion, Hefner was confident in his innocence: ÔitÕs a small price to pay for personal freedom.Õ17 
By which he meant, of course, personal freedom for men like him. 
After his death in 2017, the original playboy was described again and again in the press as a Ôcomplex figureÕ. The Huffington Post wrote of his Ôcontradictory feminist legacyÕ,18 
and the BBC asked Ôwas the Playboy revolution good for women?Õ19 
One British journalist argued that Hefner had Ôhelped push feminism forwardsÕ: 
[Hefner] took a particularly progressive stance to the 
contraceptive pill and abortion rights, which the magazine often 
plugged, and kept readers up-to-date with the struggles women 
were facing; leading up to the legalisation of abortion in 1973, 
Playboy featured at least 30 different commentaries on the Roe 
V. Wade case and large features from doctors.20 

None of these eulogists seemed to recognise that HefnerÕs commitment to decoupling reproduction from sex had nothing to do with a commitment to womenÕs wellbeing. Hefner never once campaigned for anything that didnÕt bring him direct benefit, and, when fear of pregnancy was one of the last remaining reasons for women saying ÔnoÕ, he had every reason to wish for a change that would widen the pool of women available to him. 
Marilyn Monroe was scraped out again and again by backstreet abortionists because she died almost a decade before the Pill was made available to unmarried women in all American states. Playboy magazine existed for twenty years in a country without legalised abortion. The sexual revolution began in a society fresh from the horrors of the Second World War and enjoying a new form of affluence, but its outriders initially bore a lot of illegitimate children and suffered a lot of botched abortions. The 1966 film Alfie stars a gorgeous young Michael Caine bed-hopping around London and enjoying the libertine lifestyle promised by the swinging sixties. But his actions have consequences and, in the emotional climax of the film, Alfie cries as he is confronted with the grisly product of a backstreet abortion he has procured for one of his ÔbirdsÕ. 
The story of the sexual revolution isnÕt only a story of women freed from the burdens of chastity and motherhood, although it is that. It is also a story of the triumph of the playboy Ð a figure who is too often both forgotten and forgiven, despite his central role in this still recent history. Second-wave feminists were right to argue that women needed contraception and legalised abortion in order to give them control over their reproductive lives, and the arrival of this technology was a good and needful innovation, since it has freed so many women from the body-breaking work of unwanted childbearing. But the likes of Hefner also wanted this technology, and needed it, if they were to achieve the goal of liberating their own libidos while pretending that they were liberating women. 
Sexual liberalism and its discontents 
In SophoclesÕ Antigone Ð a play particularly attentive to the duty and suffering of women Ð the chorus sing that Ônothing that is vast enters into the life of mortals without a curse.Õ The societal impact of the Pill was vast and, two generations on, we havenÕt yet fully understood both its blessing and its curse. There have been plenty of periods in human history in which the norms around sex have been loosened: the late Roman Empire, Georgian Britain, and the Roaring Twenties in America are the best remembered. But these phases of licentiousness were self-limited by the lack of good contraception, and thus straight men in pursuit of extramarital sex were mostly obliged to seek out sex either with women in prostitution or with the small number of eccentric women who were willing to risk being cast out permanently from respectable society. The Bloomsbury set, for instance, who famously Ôlived in squares and loved in trianglesÕ, had plenty of illicit sexual encounters. They also produced a lot of illegitimate children, and were protected from destitution only as a result of the privileges of their class. 
But the sexual revolution of the 1960s stuck, and its ideology is now the ideological sea we swim in Ð so normalised that we can hardly see it for what it is. It was able to persist because of the arrival, for the first time in the history of the world, of reliable contraception and, in particular, forms of contraception that women could take charge of themselves, such as the Pill, the diaphragm, and subsequent improvements on the technology, such as the intrauterine device (IUD). Thus, at the end of the 1960s, an entirely new creature arrived in the world: the apparently fertile young woman whose fertility had in fact been put on hold. She changed everything. 
This book is an attempt to reckon with that change, and to do so while avoiding the accounts typically offered by liberals addicted to a narrative of progress or conservatives addicted to a narrative of decline. I donÕt believe that the last sixty years or so should be understood as a period of exclusive progress or exclusive decline, because the sexual revolution has not freed all of us, but it has freed some of us, and selectively, and at a price. Which is exactly what we should expect from any form of social change Ôthat is vastÕ, as this one certainly is. And although I am writing against a conservative narrative of the post-1960s era, and in particular those conservatives who are silly enough to think that returning to the 1950s is either possible or desirable, I am writing in a more deliberate and focused way against a liberal narrative of sexual liberation which I think is not only wrong but also harmful. 
My complaint is focused more against liberals than against conservatives for a very personal reason: I used to believe the liberal narrative. As a younger woman, I held the same political opinions as most other millennial urban graduates in the West Ð in other words, I conformed to the beliefs of my class, including liberal feminist ideas about porn, BDSM, hook-up culture, evolutionary psychology, and the sex trade, which will all be addressed in this book. I let go of these beliefs because of my own life experiences, including a period immediately after university spent working at a rape crisis centre. If the old quip tells us that a Ôconservative is just a liberal who has been mugged by realityÕ, then I suppose, at least in my case, that a post-liberal feminist is just a liberal feminist who has witnessed the reality of male violence up close. 
IÕm using the term Ôliberal feminismÕ to describe a form of feminism that is usually not described as such by its proponents, who nowadays are more likely to call themselves Ôintersectional feministsÕ. But I donÕt think that their ideology actually is intersectional, according to KimberlŽ CrenshawÕs original meaning, in that it does not properly incorporate an analysis of other forms of social stratification, particularly economic class. The advantage of using Ôliberal feminismÕ instead is that it places these twenty-first-century ideas within a longer intellectual history, making clear that this is a feminist iteration of a much grander intellectual project: liberalism. 
The definition of ÔliberalismÕ is contested Ð indeed, the first line of the Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy entry tells us that Ôliberalism is more than one thingÕ Ð which means that, whatever definition I choose to work with, IÕll leave some critics unhappy. But IÕm reluctant to bore readers by offering a long-winded defence of my working definition, so IÕll be brief. 
IÕm not using ÔliberalÕ as short-hand for Ôleft wingÕ Ð in fact, far from it. The American post-liberal political theorist Patrick Deneen describes economic liberalism and social liberalism as intertwined, with a liberal cultural elite and a liberal corporate elite working hand in hand: ÔTodayÕs corporate ideology has a strong affinity with the lifestyles of those who are defined by mobility, ethical flexibility, liberalism (whether economic or social), a consumerist mentality in which choice is paramount, and a ÒprogressiveÓ outlook in which rapid change and Òcreative destructionÓ are the only certainties.Õ21 

Post-liberals such as Deneen draw attention to the costs of social liberalism, a political project that seeks to free individuals from the external constraints placed on us by location, family, religion, tradition, and even (and most relevant to feminists) the human body. In that sense, they are in agreement with many social conservatives. But post-liberals are also critical of the other side of the liberal coin: a free market ideology that seeks to free individuals from all of these constraints in order to maximise their ability to work and to consume. The atomised worker with no commitment to any place or person is the worker best able to respond quickly to the demands of the market. This ideal liberal subject can move to wherever the jobs are because she has no connection to anywhere in particular; she can do whatever labour is asked of her without any moral objection derived from faith or tradition; and, without a spouse or family to attend to, she never needs to demand rest days or a flexible schedule. And then, with the money earned from this rootless labour, she is able to buy consumables that will soothe any feelings of unhappiness, thus feeding the economic engine with maximum efficiency. 
Liberal feminism takes this market-orientated ideology and applies it to issues specific to women. For instance, when the actress and campaigner Emma Watson was criticised in 2017 for showing her breasts on the cover of Vanity Fair, she hit back with a well-worn liberal feminist phrase: Ôfeminism is about giving women choice É ItÕs about freedom.Õ22 
For liberal feminists such as Watson, that might mean the freedom to wear revealing clothes (and sell lots of magazines in the process), or the freedom to sell sex, or make or consume porn, or pursue whatever career you like, just like the boys. 
With the right tools, freedom from the constraints imposed by the female body now becomes increasingly possible. DonÕt want to have children in your twenties or thirties? Freeze your eggs. Called away on a work trip postpartum? Fed-Ex your breastmilk to your newborn. Want to continue working fulltime without interruption? Employ a live-in nanny, or Ð better yet Ð a surrogate who can bear the child for you. And now, with the availability of sex reassignment medical technologies, even stepping out of your female body altogether has become an option. Liberal feminism promises women freedom Ð and when that promise comes up against the hard limits imposed by biology, then the ideology directs women to chip away at those limits through the use of money, technology and the bodies of poorer people. 
I donÕt reject the desire for freedom Ð IÕm not an anti-liberal, and goodness knows that women have every reason to chafe against the constraints imposed on us by our societies and our bodies, both in the past and in the modern world. But I am critical of any ideology that fails to balance freedom against other values, and IÕm also critical of the failure of liberal feminism to interrogate where our desire for a certain type of freedom comes from, too often referring back to a circular logic by which a womanÕs choices are good because she chooses them, just like Sex and the CityÕs Charlotte York yelping ÔI choose my choice, I choose my choice!Õ 
In this book IÕm going to ask Ð and seek to answer Ð some questions about freedom that liberal feminism canÕt or wonÕt answer: Why do so many women desire a kind of sexual freedom that so obviously serves male interests? What if our bodies and minds arenÕt as malleable as we might like to think? What do we lose when we prioritise freedom above all else? And, above all, how should we act, given all this? 
Some of my conclusions might not be welcome, since they draw attention to the hard limits on our freedom that canÕt be surmounted, however much we try. And I start from a position that historically has often been a source of discomfort for feminists of all ideological persuasions: I accept the fact that men and women are different, and that those differences arenÕt going away. When we recognise these limits and these differences, then sexual politics takes on a different character. Instead of asking ÔHow can we all be free?Õ, we must ask instead ÔHow can we best promote the wellbeing of both men and women, given that these two groups have different sets of interests, which are sometimes in tension?Õ 
Sexual disenchantment 
IÕm going to argue in this book that Western sexual culture in the twenty-first century doesnÕt properly balance these interests Ð instead, it promotes the interests of the Hugh Hefners of the world at the expense of the Marilyn Monroes. And the influence of liberal feminism means that too many women donÕt recognise this truth, blithely accepting HefnerÕs claim that all of the downsides of the new sexual culture are just Ôa small price to pay for personal freedomÕ. 
Which suits the likes of Hefner very nicely, since playboys like him have a lot to gain from the new sexual culture. It is in their interests to push a particularly radical idea about sex that has come out of the sexual revolution and has proved remarkably influential, despite its harms. This is the idea that sex is nothing more than a leisure activity, invested with meaning only if the participants choose to give it meaning. Proponents of this idea argue that sex has no intrinsic specialness, that it is not innately different from any other kind of social interaction, and that it can therefore be commodified without any trouble. The sociologist Max Weber described the ÔdisenchantmentÕ of the natural world that resulted from the Enlightenment, as the ascendence of rationality stripped away the sense of magic that this Ôenchanted gardenÕ had once held for pre.modern people. In much the same way, sex has been disenchanted23 
in the post-1960s West, leaving us with a society that (ostensibly) believes that sex means nothing. 
Sexual disenchantment is a natural consequence of the liberal privileging of freedom over all other values, because, if you want to be utterly free, you have to take aim at any kind of social restrictions that limit you, particularly the belief that sex has some unique, intangible value Ð some specialness that is difficult to rationalise. From this belief in the specialness of sex comes a host of potentially unwelcome phenomena, including patriarchal religious systems. But when we attempt to disenchant sex, and so pretend that this particular act is neither uniquely wonderful nor uniquely violating, then there is another kind of cost. 
That cost falls disproportionately on women, for biological reasons that IÕll come back to in the next chapter. And liberal feminists do seem to recognise this disproportionate impact, as demonstrated by the popularity of the Me Too movement, which began in earnest in 2017. This outpouring of rage and sorrow was evidence of a sexual culture that wasnÕt working for women. The stories that came out of Me Too included plenty of unambiguously criminal behaviour, but there were also a lot of women who described sexual encounters that were technically consensual but nevertheless left them feeling terrible because they were being asked to treat as meaningless something that they felt to be meaningful. The boss who expects sexual favours as a condition of promotion, or the date who expects a woman to Ôput outÕ when he pays for dinner, are both more than willing to accept the principle of sexual disenchantment and thus view sex as a meaningless product to be exchanged on a free market (ÔYou suck me off, I give you some good of equivalent valueÕ). One student wrote, for instance, of hooking up with one of her peers: 

description, and IÕm sure most readers will have done the same. But, while it might sometimes be annoying to receive this request, no worker who makes coffee for their boss will expect to end up dependent on drugs or alcohol as a consequence. No one will expect to become pregnant or acquire a disease that causes infertility. No one will expect to suffer from PTSD or other mental illness. No one will expect to become incapable of having healthy intimate relationships for the rest of her life. Everyone knows that having sex is not the same as making coffee, and when an ideology of sexual disenchantment demands that we pretend otherwise the result can be a distressing form of cognitive dissonance. 
And liberal feminists donÕt have the conceptual framework necessary to resolve this distress. The GuardianÕs Jessica Valenti, for instance, described the phenomenon of violating sex that doesnÕt actually meet the legal threshold for rape in a column written at the height of Me Too: ÔItÕs true that women are fed up with sexual violence and harassment; but itÕs also true that what this culture considers ÒnormalÓ sexual behavior is often harmful to women, and that we want that to stop, too.Õ25 

But an anthology of essays on the subject of Me Too, edited by Valenti and published in 2020, demonstrates the inability of her brand of liberal feminism to respond properly to the problem she identifies.26 
The contributors to the anthology all want sexual violence to end, and rightly so. But theyÕre queasy about using the power of the state to arrest and imprison rapists, and they donÕt want women to have to change their behaviour in order to avoid exposure to dangerous men, since even raising this possibility is regarded as 
Ôvictim blamingÕ. Rather than propose alternatives Ð vigilante justice, anyone? Ð the writers avoid contending with difficult questions at all. They limit themselves to milquetoast ideas such as helping men to overcome their Ômasculine insecuritiesÕ (Tahir Duckett) or creating community spaces in which perpetrators can seek Ôhealing and justiceÕ (Sarah Deer and Bonnie Clairmont). Contributors such as the campaigner Andrea L. Pino-Silva write of the need to Ôtalk seriously about ending sexual violenceÕ but propose nothing more concrete than workshops on university campuses that, among much else, Ôcelebrate and empower queernessÕ. Pino-Silva believes that such workshops wonÕt work unless they also tackle every form of oppression under the sun, from colonialism to biphobia. I donÕt believe these workshops will work at all, so I suppose thatÕs one point we can agree on. 
Some contributors not only reject ideas that might go some way towards alleviating the problem of sexual violence, they actually propose ideas that will make the problem worse. Sassafras Lowrey encourages rape survivors to seek out sexual partners with a taste for violence, otherwise known as Ôjoining the BDSM communityÕ, and Tina Horn presents prostitution as a benign career route for young women. This is the central principle of liberal feminism taken to its logical conclusion: a woman should be able to do anything she likes, whether that be selling sex or inviting consensual sexual violence, since all of her desires and choices must necessarily be good, no matter where they come from or where they lead. And if anything bad comes from following this principle, then we return to the only 
solution that liberal feminism has to offer: Ôteach men not to rape.Õ But then what else can liberal feminists advise? They have made the error of buying into an ideology that has always best served the likes of Hugh Hefner and Harvey Weinstein, his true heir. And from this they derive the false belief that women are still suffering only because the sexual liberation project of the 1960s is unfinished, rather than because it was always inherently flawed. Thus they prescribe more and more freedom and are continually surprised when their prescription doesnÕt cure the disease. 
This fact becomes clear when we look at the twenty-first-century university campus, where the gospel of sexual liberation is preached loudest and where BDSM societies27 
and ÔSex WeeksÕ28 
are the new normal.29 
At the beginning of term, freshers are given a lecture on the importance of consent and sent on their way with ÔI heart consentÕ badges and tote bags. The rule theyÕre taught is simple enough: with consent, anything goes. And yet this simple rule is broken again and again, both through rape and through the more subtle forms of coercion that so many women recounted during Me Too. Few liberal feminists are willing to draw the link between the culture of sexual hedonism they promote and the anxieties over campus rape that have emerged at exactly the same time. 
If they did, they might be forced to recognise that they have done a terrible thing in advising inexperienced young women to seek out situations in which they are alone and drunk with horny men who are not only bigger and stronger than they are but are also likely to have been raised on the kind of porn that normalises aggression, coercion and pain. But in liberal feminist circles youÕre not supposed to talk about the influence of online porn, or BDSM, or hook-up culture, or any of the other malign elements of our new sexual culture, because to do so would be to question the doctrine of sexual freedom. So young women are forced to learn for themselves that freedom has costs, and they are forced to learn the hard way, every time. 

Chronological snobbery 
This book began as a standard piece of cultural analysis, but I realised when I began writing that it needed to go further. It wasnÕt enough just to point out the problems with our new sexual culture and leave it at that Ð I needed to offer readers some real guidance on how to live. Advice on sex is too often trivialised and shoved to the back of the magazine, with feminist arguments over sexual culture dismissed as so much girly bickering. But what weÕre concerned with here is not only the most important relationships in most peopleÕs lives but also the continuation of our species. So when I chose the title of this chapter, I was thinking not only of the problem of sexual disenchantment but also of the role of the advice columnist, who is rarely taken as seriously as she should be. Having sex should be taken seriously, and so should talking about it. ItÕs a serious matter. 
The advice IÕm offering applies almost exclusively to heterosexuals, particularly heterosexual women, because the effect of the sexual revolution on relations between the sexes is the subject of this book. 
And none of it is ground-breaking: anyone who has spent enough time living in the world and learning from her mistakes should be able to cobble together a set of rules that look much like mine. But while a lot of my advice will seem like common sense to most older readers, my experience of talking face-to-face with men and women under the age of thirty is that it is shocking enough to make a personÕs jaw drop (literally, in several cases). 
I would probably have been just as shocked a decade ago, because I didnÕt know any of this when I was a younger woman. I thought, stupidly, that I understood life better than anyone else, as teenagers typically do, and I realised my mistake only years later, having learned the hard way and having watched my friends do the same. This wasnÕt because my parents or other adults in my life failed me Ð far from it Ð and I wasnÕt in any way unusual among my peers. But I was raised in a liberal environment that leant too heavily on a simplistic ÔprogressÕ narrative of history, and the problem with this narrative is that it encourages us to ignore both the ways in which things may have become worse over time and the advice offered by older generations. C. S. Lewis coined the phrase Ôchronological snobberyÕ to describe Ô[T]he uncritical acceptance of the intellectual climate of our own age and the assumption that whatever has gone out of date is on that count discredited.Õ30 

Older people are dismissed by snobbish twenty-first-century liberals as not only foolish and uninteresting but also (far worse) as ÔproblematicÕ. While in most cultures the elderly are regarded as sources of wisdom, and thus granted particular respect, in the modern West they are more likely to be disregarded and condescended to, shut away in nursing homes and assumed to be of 
no use to anyone. At the end of every year, a rush of articles in liberal publications advise twenty-somethings on how best to withstand the problematic opinions voiced by older relatives over Thanksgiving or Christmas dinner (ÔItÕs your responsibility to challenge bigoted relatives over the holidaysÕ, advised Teen Vogue, for instance, in 2019). The fetishisation of youth in our culture has given us the false idea that it is young people who are best placed to provide moral guidance to their elders, despite their obvious lack of experience. And for anyone nudging forty, be assured that the ÔproblematicÕ bell also tolls for thee. The articles that have appeared regularly since 2018 on the Ôhomophobia, sexism and fat-shamingÕ in the sitcom Friends prove the need for constant renewal within the progress model.31 
When popular culture less than three decades old is already condemned as unacceptable, what hope have people who are more than three decades old of keeping pace? They canÕt, thatÕs the point Ð the model demands that we reject them. 
Within living memory, we have witnessed a very sudden break with the norms of the past, and the necessity of this break is constantly justified in the liberal media through reference to the bad old days. This kind of present-centrism is parodied beautifully in a 2020 TV adaptation of Aldous HuxleyÕs Brave New World in which the ÔSavage LandsÕ Ð more like an Indian reservation in the novel Ð are reimagined as a theme park devoted to twenty-first-century American decline. Twenty-sixth-century New London visitors load onto a tour bus and gawp at the Ôhouse of correctionÕ (a prison) and the Ôhouse of monogamyÕ (a church), and witness a re-enactment of what is presented as the most important event in the savagesÕ calendar, Ôthe annual day of blackÕ (Black Friday), in which shoppers tear each other to pieces in their lust for bargains. 
A tour guide informs visitors cheerfully that the key elements of savage culture included Ôjealousy, competition, greed and strife.Õ SheÕs not wrong, of course. The Savage Lands theme park is designed to demonstrate to New Londoners the perils of the old way of life, and its inclusion in the drama is designed to show us how tempting the twenty-sixth century could seem when set beside the twenty-first. These future people have successfully rid themselves of many of our flaws: their lack of privacy ensures a lack of crime; their lack of family ensures a lack of in-group preference; and their lack of monogamy ensures a lack of sexual jealousy. The cost that citizens pay for all this stability is that they must live under an authoritarian regime that suppresses any discontent with the pleasure drug soma. This regime encourages the citizens of New London to visit the Savage Lands theme park because demonising the past serves to justify the status quo. Conservatives in our own era who idealise the past achieve much the same effect in reverse, because the past is a political weapon that can readily be used to colour our perspective on the present. 
I reject the poisonous dichotomy that insists that the past must be either all good or all bad. I donÕt think that we should imitate any sexual culture of the past, but nor do I think that what we have seen over the last sixty years has been a process of relentless improvement. WhatÕs clever about the Savage Lands of Brave New World is that the theme park representation is honest, up to a point. The twenty-first century is an era of Ôjealousy, competition, greed and strifeÕ that is easy enough to condemn. But there is also a dishonest side to the Savage Lands, in that highlighting the evils of the past also serves to distract from the evils of the present. TodayÕs progressive representation of life in the 1950s serves much the same purpose. 
In 2016, an extract from a 1950s home economics book offering Ôtips to look after your husbandÕ went viral on social media. The housewife was advised that, when her husband got home from work, she should have dinner on the table, her apron off and a ribbon in her hair, and that she should always make sure to let her husband Ôtalk firstÕ.32 
This advice was not unusual for housewife manuals of the time, or indeed those of earlier eras, all of which advise women to make their housekeeping look effortless, hiding grime and exertion from their menfolk. 
How reactionary, we think now, how stupid and backward! But then take a look at a small sample of Cosmopolitan magazine guides published within the last decade: Ô30 ways to please a manÕ,33 
Ô20 ways to turn on your manÕ,34 
or ÔHow to turn him on Ð 42 things to do with a naked manÕ35 
(this last guide includes Ôrim himÕ and Ôdole out some flavored lubeÕ). In what sense are these guides not encouraging precisely the same degree of focus on male desires, except in this case it is sexual pleasure rather than domestic comfort? The only difference I can see is that the arse licking is now literal. 
Women are still expected to please men and to make it look effortless. But while the 1950s Ôangel of the houseÕ hid her apron, the modern Ôangel of the bedroomÕ hides her pubic hair. This waxed and willing swan glides across the water, concealing the fact that beneath the surface she is furiously working to maintain her image of perfection. She pretends to orgasm, pretends to like anal sex, and pretends not to mind when the Ôfriends with benefitsÕ arrangement causes her pain. IÕve spoken to women who suffered from vaginismus for years without telling their partners that being penetrated was excruciating. IÕve also spoken to women who have had abortions after hook-ups and never told the men who impregnated them because, while sharing the inside of their bodies was expected, revealing the inconvenient fact of their fertility felt too intimate. We have smoothly transitioned from one form of feminine subservience to another, but we pretend that this one is liberation. 
This pretence hurts the Marilyn Monroes, particularly when they are poor and friendless, and I want above all in this book to speak to the young women who have been lied to by liberal feminism and so risk following a very, very dangerous example. 
But the would-be Hugh Hefners are also hurt by the pretence, albeit in a less obvious way. Mouldering away in the Playboy mansion doesnÕt kill a person, but it does corrode them. True happiness is not to be found on a soiled mattress being ridden by a woman who doesnÕt even like you. 
Liberal ideology flatters us by telling us that our desires are good and that we can find meaning in satisfying them, whatever the cost. But the lie of this flattery should be obvious to anyone who has ever realised after the fact that they were wrong to desire something, and hurt themselves, or hurt other people, in pursuing it. So I am going to propose an alternative form of sexual culture Ð one that recognises other human beings as real people, invested with real value and dignity. ItÕs time for a sexual counter-revolution. 

Notes 
1. 

Gianluca Mezzofiore, ÔNo, that viral picture doesnÕt show Hugh Hefner lighting a cigarette for Marilyn MonroeÕ, 28 September 2017, 
https://mashable.com/2017/09/28/marilyn-monroe-hugh.
hefner-fake-picture-playboy/?europe=true. 


2. 

Jack Shepherd, ÔHugh Hefner dead: Playboy founder is being buried next to Marilyn MonroeÕ, 28 September 2017, www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news. 


3. 

Jeff Gottlieb, ÔFor sale: eternity with Marilyn MonroeÕ, 14 August 2009, 
www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm-2009-aug-14-me.
marilyn14-story.html. 


4. 

Brad Witter, ÔMarilyn Monroe didnÕt actually pose for the first issue of PlayboyÕ, 8 September 2020, 

www.biography.com/news/marilyn-monroe-playboy-first-issue.
didnt-pose. 


5. 

Scott Johnson, 4 October 2017, www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/playboys-first-black.


playmate-reflects-hugh-hefners-legacy-1045838. 


6. 

Witter, ÔMarilyn Monroe didnÕt actually poseÕ. 

7. 

ÔHugh Hefner will be buried next to Marilyn MonroeÕ, 29 September 
2017, 
www.telegraph.co.uk/films/2017/09/29/hugh.
hefner-buried-next-marilyn-monroe-fans-not-happy/. 





8. 
Megan C. Hills, ÔHow Hugh Hefner built an entire empire without Marilyn MonroeÕs consentÕ, 29 September 2017, www.marieclaire.co.uk/news/celebrity-news/hugh-hefner.
marilyn-monroe-541688. 

9. 

Andrea Dworkin, Right-Wing Women. New York: Perigee Books, [1978] 1983, p. 18. 

10. 

Corita Grudzen, Daniella Meeker, Jacqueline Torres et al., ÔComparison of the mental health of female adult film performers and other young women in CaliforniaÕ, Psychiatric Services 62 (2011): 639Ð45. 

11. 

Sam Kashner, ÔMarilyn and her monstersÕ, 5 October 2010, www.vanityfair.com/culture/2010/11/marilyn-monroe-201011. 


12. 

ÔHugh Hefner quotesÕ, 28 September 2017, https://heavy.com/entertainment/2017/09/hugh-hefner-quotes.
on-life-death-playboy-is-alive-dead/. 


13. 

Olivia 
Bahou, 
11 
June 
2015, 
www.cosmopolitan.com/sex.
love/news/a41845/worst-things-playmates-said-about-playboy.
mansion/. 


14. 

Ibid. 

15. 

Sharon 
Waxman, 
28 
September 
2017, 
www.thewrap.com/hugh.
hefner-legacy-no-feminist-hero/. 


16. 

Graeme Culliford, ÔSickening pimp secretÕ, 2 October 2017, www.thesun.co.uk/news/4585472/brit-model-lured-girls-to-the.
playboy-mansion-to-have-orgies-with-hugh-hefner/. 


17. 

Brooks Barnes, ÔThe loin in winterÕ, 23 October 2009, www.nytimes.com/2009/10/24/business/media/24hefner.html? 
pagewanted=2&sq=hefner&st=cse&scp=1. 


18. 

Emma Gray, ÔThe contradictory feminist legacy of PlayboyÕs Hugh HefnerÕ, 29 September 2017, 

www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/playboy-hugh-hefner-feminist.
contradiction_n_59cd07c4e4b0210dfdfc822d?ri18n=true. 


19. 

Nalina Eggert, ÔHugh Hefner death: was the Playboy revolution good for women?Õ, 28 September 2017, www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-41426299. 


20. 

Pascale Day, ÔOpinionÕ, 28 September 2017, https://metro.co.uk/2017/09/28/hugh-hefner-might-have-been.
a-sleaze-but-playboy-helped-push-feminism-forwards-6963213/? 
ito=cbshare. 


21. 

Patrick J. Deneen, June 2015, www.firstthings.com/article/2015/06/the-power-elite. 


22. 
See 
www.theguardian.com/film/2017/mar/05/emma-watson.
vanity-fair-cover-feminism. 

23. 
Thanks to the American writer Aaron Sibarium for coining the term Ôsexual disenchantmentÕ here: see https://americancompass.org/the-commons/three-theses-about.
cuties/. 
24. 
https://medium.com/@totalsratmove?p=2194a96bdbb6. 

25. 
Jessica Valenti, Ô#MeToo is about more than stopping rapeÕ, 31 January 2018, www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/jan/31/me-too-we.
demand-more-jessica-valenti. 

26. 
Jessica Valenti and Jaclyn Friedman, Believe Me: How Trusting Women Can Change the World. New York: Basic Books. 
27. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_universities_with_BDSM 
_clubs. 
28. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_Week_at_Yale. 

29. 

Allie Grasgreen, ÔFifty shades of crimsonÕ, 5 December 2012, www.insidehighered.com/news/2012/12/05/kink-clubs.
harvards-well-established-healthy-students. 


30. 

C. S. Lewis, Surprised by Joy. London: HarperCollins, 2012. 


31. 
See 
www.glamour.com/story/12-friends-moments-that-will.
totally-make-you-cringe-now. 

32. 
Laura House, ÔPlan dinner the night before, NEVER complain and speak in a soft voiceÕ, 7 December 2016, www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-4011366/Cringeworthy.
1950s-marriage-advice-teaching-housewives-look-husbands.html. 
33. 
www.cosmopolitan.com/sex-love/advice/g3765/ways-to-please.
a-man/. 
34. 
www.cosmopolitan.com/uk/love-sex/sex/tips/g1508/turn-him.
on-sex-tips/. 

35. 
www.cosmopolitan.com/sex.
love/confessions/advice/g1788/how-to-turn-him-on/. 





Men and Women Are Different 
A Natural History of Rape by Randy Thornhill and Craig T. Palmer is not a book that feminists are supposed to like.1 
It isnÕt even a book that feminists are supposed to read. Following its publication in 2000, the authors of this academic book were widely denounced in the media and for a while received so many credible death threats that they were advised by the police to check their cars for bombs regularly.2 
Thornhill and PalmerÕs efforts to offer an evolutionary explanation for rape were not Ð to put it mildly Ð generally well received. 
But when I first came across the book, I read it compulsively, all in one sitting, and was left by the end feeling both disconsolate and oddly satisfied. I was working at the time at a rape crisis centre. My job was to work one-to-one with women and girls who had been raped, but I also had a teaching role, training volunteers for our helpline and going into schools to teach consent workshops. The ideology that I was expected to teach leant heavily on a very particular academic model of rape, and over time I had developed doubts about this model. A Natural History of Rape was a revelation to me because it articulated those doubts and gave them substance. I learned that I hadnÕt been wrong to think that there was a problem with the conventional feminist understanding of rape Ð the problem really was there, and it couldnÕt be wished away. 
The 1975 book Against Our Will by Susan Brownmiller remains the foundational feminist text on the subject of rape. Indeed, it has become a classic, so much so that in 1995 it was selected by the New York Public Library as one of 100 most important books of the twentieth century.3 
Its fame is deserved, since BrownmillerÕs analysis was revolutionary, if flawed, and arrived at a crucial historical moment during the height of the feminist second wave. In particular, BrownmillerÕs claim that rape has historically more often been conceptualised as a property crime committed against a womanÕs male kin rather than as a crime committed against the woman herself was both true and timely. This is why marital rape Ð the abuse of a husbandÕs ÔpropertyÕ Ð was only relatively recently criminalised in the West, and it remains legal in many non-Western countries. The fight for its criminalisation has been one of the great feminist campaigning efforts of the last century and has not yet been fully won. Against Our Will helped to galvanise that effort in the 1970s and 1980s, which was a very fine achievement. For that alone, the book merits praise. 
BrownmillerÕs argument is summed up in a famous quote from Against Our Will, in which she describes rape as Ônothing more or less than a conscious process of intimidation by which all men keep all women in a state of fear.Õ4 
BrownmillerÕs model understands rape as an expression of political, as well as physical, dominance. Thus she suggests that the vast over-representation of men among perpetrators of rape is a product not of biology but, rather, of patriarchy: a social system which privileges male interests over female ones. According to this view, rapists are not born but made Ð they are the products of a culture that encourages men to see women as their sexual playthings. And so, to end rape, we must first end patriarchy. 
Over the last fifty years, this argument has remained influential among feminists of every ideological persuasion. For instance Jill Filipovic, writing in The Guardian in 2013, expresses a mainstream feminist idea when she insists that rape is Ôabout both power and violence. Rapists use sex organs as the locus of their violence, but rape isnÕt about sex, at least not in the sense of being motivated by sexual attraction or an uncontrollable sexual urge.Õ5 
This sentiment is often expressed in one, succinct phrase: Ôrape is about power, not sex.Õ 
I often repeated this view as a rape crisis worker Ð in fact, I probably used the exact phrase. I felt that to say otherwise Ð to suggest that rapists are motivated by sexual desire, not just a desire for control Ð would be to excuse them, which of course I didnÕt want to do, given that I was daily witnessing the terrible and lasting harm done by rape. Plus there really is some truth to the claim Ð workplace sexual harassment, for instance, is almost never perpetrated by junior men against more senior women. Instead it follows a predictable gradient: perpetrated by those with more power against those with less. 
But I realise now that I wanted to believe that power was the whole story in large part because I found the alternative hypothesis too depressing for words. In a new preface to Against Our Will, written 
in 2013, Brownmiller (ungenerously) represented this alternative: Some evolutionary biologists believe quite strongly in the grim inevitability of Ômen will be men.Õ A vocal handful of neo-Darwinians theorize that rape is a cost-effective strategy for males (embedded with drives for aggression, promiscuity, and reproduction) to spread their genes widely with a minimal amount of parental investment. What a fancy argument for rape, and for the failure to pay child support, as natural behavior!6 

If we think that rape is Ônatural behaviourÕ then we must Ð according to BrownmillerÕs view here Ð also think of it as, firstly, permissible and, secondly, inevitable. This first claim is a textbook example of the naturalistic fallacy: the false belief that because something is natural it must necessarily be good. But the second claim is more difficult. If rape is indeed a product of evolution, does that make it inevitable? Well, not necessarily, but it certainly does make it more difficult to eradicate, which is, I think, a key reason for the historical reluctance of feminists to accept the scientific argument that Brownmiller is so contemptuous of. Instead, most feminists continue to favour socialisation theory as the preferred way of explaining male and female behaviour, both good and bad. This theory is popular among liberal feminists, whom I discussed at length in the last chapter, but it is also popular among the other key group of feminists still active in the twenty-first century: radical feminists, generally defined as those feminists who call for the radical restructuring of a society understood to be male supremacist. 
Socialisation theory insists that there are no innate psychological differences between men and women, and that any differences we observe must be the product of nurture, not nature. There is some evidence in support of this theory. In her bestselling book Delusions of Gender, the Australian academic and author Cordelia Fine outlines the long history of researchersÕ attempts to find definitive proof for innate differences, concluding that the case for socialisation theory is ultimately much stronger. She makes clear that there is plenty of evidence that males and females experience very different treatment throughout their lifetimes. For instance, in one typical study described by Fine: 
Mothers were shown an adjustable sloping walkway, and asked to estimate the steepness of slope their crawling eleven-month.old child could manage and would attempt. Girls and boys differed in neither crawling ability nor risk taking when it came to testing them on the walkway. But mothers underestimated girls and over-estimated boys Ð both in crawling ability and crawling attempts Ð meaning that in the real world they might often wrongly think their daughters incapable of performing or attempting some motor feats, and equally erroneously think their sons capable of others.7 

These differences in socialisation start from the moment a child is born, and we donÕt know exactly how much of an effect they have long term. However, it seems likely that they do have some effect and that the observed psychological differences between the sexes are therefore at least partially attributable to childhood socialisation. Thus feminism in the post-second-wave era has often paid close attention to childrearing, for instance objecting to toys or advertising 

that promote gender stereotypes. At the heart of this resocialisation project is a fundamentally utopian idea: if the differences we see between the sexes are entirely socialised, then they must also be entirely curable through cultural reform, which means that, if all of us, right now, could accept the feminist truth and start raising our children differently, then within a generation we could remake the world. 
ItÕs a nice idea, and I used to sincerely believe in it. But the evidence put forward by the authors of A Natural History of Rape, as well as many other scientists, forces us to reckon with a possibility that is a lot less appealing: what if itÕs not that easy? What if hierarchy, and viciousness, and violence are baked in? What if the feminist task is much, much harder than weÕve previously acknowledged? 
Human animals 
Brownmiller writes in Against Our Will that Ôno zoologist, as far as I know, has ever observed that animals rape in their natural habitat, the wild.Õ8 
This statement is wrong Ð egregiously wrong, in fact, because plenty of other animals commit rape, and they also behave in all of the other horrible ways in which human beings sometimes behave. This grim fact has been revealed in many studies published within the last forty-seven years, but it was already well known by 1975. A few years earlier, for instance, the British primatologist John MacKinnon had published his pioneering account of fifteen and a 
half months spent observing wild orangutans and had described many instances of Ôunwilling females being raped by aggressive males.Õ9 
Other researchers have since observed the same behaviour among orangutans,10 
as well as among other animals.11 
We are not the only species that rapes. 
Socialisation theory depends upon a furtive form of human exceptionalism, by which we are understood to be both uniquely detached from the normal processes of natural selection and uniquely corruptible by cultural influence. We do bad things, according to this analysis, not because we are as fallible as any other animal, but because we have chosen to invent cultures that corrupt innocent little babies and turn them to wickedness. This Ôblank slateÕ view gives ultimate authority to society in moulding the human character, for good and ill. 
There is a more credible way of understanding the world, but it is one that offers much less scope for human perfectibility and so is much less appealing to utopians. Instead of unwittingly imitating the religious fundamentalists of the nineteenth century who resisted Darwin, we could instead understand human beings to be animals Ð more specifically, members of the Hominidae, the Great Apes, a taxonomic family of primates that includes seven other extant species. As the feminist and evolutionary biologist Sarah Blaffer Hrdy writes: We are not ready-made out of somebodyÕs rib. We are 
composites of many different legacies, put together from 
leftovers in an evolutionary process that has been going on for 
billions of years. Even the endorphins that made my labor pains 
tolerable came from molecules that humans still share with 
earthworms.12 

As a consequence of these many different legacies, coupled with evolutionary selection pressures favouring these traits, we sometimes demonstrate kindness, gentleness and friendliness. At other times we kill, torture and rape. And, like other hominids, male and female members of our species are different in certain important ways Ð both physiologically and behaviourally. 
LetÕs start with some of the physiological differences. Adult women are approximately half as strong as adult men in the upper body and two-thirds as strong in the lower body.13 
On average, men can bench press more mass than women can by a factor of roughly two and a half14 
and can punch harder by a similar factor.15 
In hand grip strength, 90 per cent of females produce less force than 95 per cent of males.16 
In other words, almost all women are weaker than almost all men, and any feminist analysis of the power dynamic between men and women has to begin with the recognition of this fact. 
And men can out-run women, as well as out-punch them. Sex differences are less marked in sports that favour endurance rather than strength alone, but they are nevertheless considerable. In Olympic swimming and track events, womenÕs performances hover at around 90 per cent of menÕs, a figure sometimes referred to as the Ôgolden ratioÕ of athletics.17 
This may sound minor, but it translates into stunning differences at the upper end of the distribution, where elite athletes are to be found. At the 2016 summer Olympics, for instance, Elaine Thompson of Jamaica won gold with a time of 10.71 seconds. In the same games, Usain Bolt, also of Jamaica, won with a time of 9.81 seconds. Although there was less than a secondÕs difference between these two athletes, if men and women had been running in the same event, then Thompson wouldnÕt even have made it into the final race. In fact, she would have been easily out-run by Jamaican boys competing in the under-seventeen category,18 
just as the United States womenÕs national football team in 2017 were beaten by the Dallas under-fifteen boysÕ team,19 
composed of boys who had just crossed the crucial puberty line and so had begun to develop the strength and power of adult men. The womenÕs category has traditionally been protected in elite sports because, if it were not protected, there would be no women in elite sports Ð men would out-compete them every time. 


For most people this observation is common sense, particularly those who have any experience of competing in sports or even just play fighting with siblings of the opposite sex. In the twenty-first century, the only group pushing back against the fact of physical differences between the sexes are liberal feminists, some of whom suggest that the womenÕs category in sports should be opened to trans athletes who have transitioned from male to female and have undergone some degree of medical intervention to reverse the effects of male puberty. Some liberal feminists go even further, arguing that the womenÕs category ought to be dissolved altogether. The British feminist Laurie Penny, for instance, wrote in 2016 on the controversy over the inclusion of trans athletes in that yearÕs summer Olympics: ÔStrict gender segregation is seldom questioned, which conveniently allows womenÕs events to be sidelined while ensuring that no sportsman will ever be beaten by a woman. But dividing sports by gender isnÕt natural or inevitable.Õ20 

Female athletes including Paula Radcliffe, Sharron Davies and Kelly Holmes Ð for whom sex differences are more than a merely philosophical problem Ð have strongly objected to this idea,21 
with Davies, for instance, insisting that, Ô[in order] to protect womenÕs sport, those with a male sex advantage should not be able to compete in womenÕs sport.Õ22 
Contrary to PennyÕs claims, no sportsman wants to maintain sex segregation in sport because heÕs afraid of being beaten by a woman Ð anyone with any practical experience of sport knows that such a fear would be fanciful. 
But recognising these kinds of physical limitation does not sit well with a liberal feminist project that aims to challenge any restrictions on human freedom. If we acknowledge that there are immovable differences between the sexes in terms of strength and speed, then we are also forced to acknowledge not only that natal males cannot fairly compete in womenÕs sports, but also that natal females experience a permanent physical disadvantage. And the consequences of this disadvantage go well beyond sports, particularly when male upper body strength is set beside the fragility of the female throat and skull. In the modern West, it has become increasingly possible to become detached from the sexually dimorphic body when one does not do a manual job, compete in sports or bear children. But the unwelcome truth will always remain, whether or not we can bear to look at it: almost all men can kill almost all women with their bare hands, but not vice versa. And that matters. 

Differences above the neck 
In contrast to their liberal counterparts, radical feminists are fully willing to accept the fact of innate physical differences between the sexes. Conventionally, however, neither liberals nor radicals are willing to go a step further and accept an even more difficult fact Ð that there are also innate differences Ôabove the neckÕ. Radical feminists committed to socialisation theory can acknowledge the existence of male upper body strength, but they refuse to acknowledge its cause. 
The growth of broad, muscly shoulders in boys costs the body energy that could be spent on other natural processes. This tells us that, during our evolutionary history, boys who developed strong upper bodies experienced a selection advantage. In the present day, we know that men with heavily muscled upper bodies are considered more attractive to straight women from a wide range of cultural backgrounds,23 
and we also know that men with this body type have a fighting advantage Ð both against other animals and against other men. It is impossible to explain this fact unless we recognise that fighting must have played an important role in menÕs evolutionary history, which also obliges us to recognise that sex-specific behaviour must also have been subject to natural selection. 
But we often run into difficulties when we try to apply this insight to the real world, because readers sceptical of the evolutionary account of gendered behaviour will probably be thinking right now about individual men they know who donÕt have especially broad shoulders and have never shown any interest in fighting of any kind. ItÕs very easy to hear Ômen and women are on average a certain wayÕ and understand this to mean Ômen and women are always like thisÕ, which anyone with any experience of the world will know is not true. There are lots of men and women who are physically dissimilar from other members of their sex, and very many more who donÕt fit masculine or feminine stereotypes in terms of their interests and behaviour. In fact, IÕd go further, and suggest that almost no one is a walking gender stereotype Ð I have some stereotypically feminine traits and some stereotypically masculine ones, and IÕm sure you do too. 
But this kind of anecdotal evidence does not disprove the claim that there are some important average differences between the sexes, and that at the population level these differences have an effect. We can insist simultaneously that there are plenty of exceptions to the rule, and moreover that there is nothing wrong with being an exception to the rule, while also acknowledging the existence of the rule. 
We are a sexually dimorphic species, but not quite as sexually dimorphic as some others. For instance, the male northern elephant seal, found in the eastern Pacific Ocean, is three times heavier than the female, and these males and females also have strikingly different behaviour patterns in terms of diet and migration. Not coincidentally, this species is also highly polygynous, with a single male inseminating as many as fifty females in a mating season. In contrast, the male harbour seal, found along Arctic and European coasts, is almost the same weight as the female and is mostly monogamous, with males and females demonstrating similar behaviour. We are closer to harbour seals than we are to elephant seals, since our females weigh on average just 25 per cent less than our males and most of our societies are only mildly polygynous. But there is some degree of sexual dimorphism that, while it may be tempered by cultural conditions, remains evident in every human society. 
The complication is that we are in one particular way different from harbour seals and northern elephant seals: as a species, we are uniquely intelligent. This means that, unlike other animals, we can choose to defy our instincts, at least to some extent, and, also unlike other animals, we have been able to spread ourselves across the planet and adjust to a wide range of environments. This kind of variation in material conditions can sometimes cause human societies to develop in very different directions. For instance, in a few cultures, mating customs look strange to us. The Na in China are famous for having no institution of marriage and deliberately suppressing long-term pair bonding, and a few Amazonian groups believe that a child can have two or more biological fathers. The anomalous mating customs of the twenty-first-century West Ð the subject of this book Ð are the product not of climate or terrain but, rather, of new technologies not available to people in the past, as I argued in chapter 
1. 
But all of this variation is built upon a biological substrate. Liberal feminists and trans activists may do their best to deny this, but it is still true that only one half of the human race is capable of getting pregnant, and Ð failing the invention of artificial wombs Ð this will remain true indefinitely. WhatÕs more, even if we were somehow to remove the human body entirely from reproduction, we would still be left with our human brains, which remain the products of our evolution. Natural selection has not kept pace with rapid social change. The brains we have now are little different from the brains of our nineteenth-century ancestors, or indeed those of our hunter gatherer ancestors, since hunting and gathering was humanityÕs first and most successful adaptation, occupying at least 90 per cent of human history. 
The effect of natural selection on psychological differences between men and women is politically thorny for a very good reason Ð it can easily be misused. Evolutionary psychologists are sometimes accused by their critics of telling Just So Stories that sound intuitively convincing but have no real evidence behind them, and there is some truth to this accusation. Some amateur theorists, and even some professionals, have run riot with their imaginations, and it is, sadly, the anti-feminists who have proved to be the most provocatively imaginative. 
An unfortunate effect of the feminist rejection of evolutionary psychology is that most feminists have deliberately stepped away from the discipline and so played only a minor role in shaping it. In fact, the very idea of there being evolved psychological differences between the sexes has become so taboo in some circles that even voicing the possibility is taken to be an indication of anti-feminist sentiment. In 2017, Google engineer James Damore circulated an internal memo in which he suggested that the under-representation of women at Google might partly be a consequence of (in his words) Ôdifferences in distributions of traits between men and womenÕ.24 
The scientific research that Damore cited was perfectly sound, but he was nevertheless fired for violating GoogleÕs code of conduct, provoking a media storm. 
The result of the taboo is that the people willing publicly to support the evolutionary account often fall into one of two categories Ð either they are not sensitive to the existence of the taboo (Damore, being autistic, was probably in this category),25 
or they are genuinely anti-feminist. It is telling that so many of the lay enthusiasts for evolutionary psychology tend to focus on one particular issue, sometimes obsessively: affirmative action designed to increase the representation of women in STEM. Part of the backlash against Damore was a result of the fact that women who work at male-dominated organisations such as Google often experience everyday sexist insults that range from mild condescension to outright sexual harassment, and many have therefore quite legitimately become sensitive to clumsy talk of Ômale brainsÕ and Ôfemale brainsÕ that can provide cover for claims of female inferiority. 
I happen to agree with Damore that the under-representation of women in STEM is probably partly attributable to innate biological differences, but that, as Damore wrote in his original memo, Ômany of these differences are small and thereÕs significant overlap between men and women, so you canÕt say anything about an individual given these population level distributions.Õ26 
What weÕre talking about when it comes to interest in the highly specialised world of tech is two bell curves that overlap, and, just as in endurance sports, itÕs only at the tails that any average difference becomes obvious. 
But while sex differences in STEM are no doubt important to people who work in those fields, in the great scheme of things they are a sideshow. There are some much bigger and more important psychological differences between the sexes that deserve our urgent attention, but what I often find when I speak to a certain kind of male enthusiast for evolutionary psychology is that they are not interested in discussing these issues. I say that I think Damore was unfairly treated and they nod along happily. But when I raise the issue of male violence they are suddenly nowhere to be seen, since this issue casts men in a rather less flattering light. 
Or, worse, they fall prey to the naturalistic fallacy. In 2020, Will Knowland, an English teacher at Eton College Ð the oldest and poshest school in the UK Ð attracted a great deal of media attention when he was dismissed for producing a video titled ÔThe Patriarchy ParadoxÕ as part of a course on critical thinking intended for older students.27 
Knowland later alleged that he was disciplined because Ôthe Head Master felt that some of the ideas put forward in my lecture Ð such as the view that men and women differ psychologically and not all of those differences are socially constructed Ð were too dangerous for the boys to be exposed to.Õ28 
IÕve no doubt this was indeed why Knowland fell foul of the authorities at Eton, at least in part, but while I am sympathetic to James Damore, given his treatment by Google, I am not sympathetic to Knowland. Some of his claims are straightforwardly false, and he betrays a poor understanding of feminism, for instance using the term Ôradical feminismÕ to mean Ôextreme feminismÕ (always a giveaway). And while his video covers some of the same ground that I have covered in this chapter, for instance strength and aggression differences between men and women, Knowland uses evolutionary biology to argue both that women are inherently inferior to men (not only smaller and weaker but also less creative and innovative), and that men have been uniquely victimised throughout human history, while women have been coddled. 
I fully understand why so many feminists are repulsed by any association with the ideology of anti-feminists such as Knowland. But we should not respond to the misuse of a scientific discipline by rejecting that discipline altogether. The evidence itself is morally neutral and can be put to all sorts of political purposes, even feminist ones. A Natural History of Rape hit me like a ton of bricks because it alerted me to the feminist potential of evolutionary psychology, a discipline I had previously rejected as inherently suspect. 

Rape as adaptation 
I wrote in chapter 
1 
that the central feminist question ought not to be ÔHow can we all be free?Õ but, rather, ÔHow can we best promote the wellbeing of both men and women, given that these two groups have different sets of interests, which are sometimes in tension?Õ Evolutionary psychology draws attention to the ways in which men and womenÕs interests are in tension, which makes the discipline difficult to reconcile with a liberal feminist emphasis on freedom or a radical feminist emphasis on utopianism. But if we stop aiming for either absolute freedom or utopia, and start thinking more pragmatically about how best to protect womenÕs interests in the here and now, then we can start to reconceptualise evolutionary psychology as a useful tool. 
I sought out A Natural History of Rape because I was bothered by certain questions that socialisation theory couldnÕt answer Ð why, for instance, such a high proportion of rape victims are teenagers. My own experience of working with victims had given me a glimpse of the demographics, and more systematic research confirms what I suspected to be the case: there is a very obvious peak in female victimisation, with the risk increasing very rapidly after the age of about twelve and decreasing again, almost as rapidly, after the age of about thirty. The very young and the very old are sometimes targeted, but this is rare: the modal victim is fifteen,29 
and the percentage of female victims who are older than thirty when they are raped is in single digits.30 
Could it really be a coincidence, I wondered, that the age of peak rape victimisation is also the age at which I personally attracted the most sexual harassment on the street? It turns out this isnÕt a coincidence, as the sociologists Richard Felson and Richard Moran write: Social science has demonstrated a strong relationship between 
age and sexual attractiveness. Heterosexual men are sexually 
attracted to young women, while homosexual men are attracted 
to young men. The age preference explains why adult film stars, 
sex workers, exotic dancers as well as glamour models are often 
young, and why their earnings decline as they age.31 

Female rape victimisation and female sexual attractiveness peak at exactly the same age Ð the two graphs map onto each other almost perfectly. Socialisation theory canÕt account for this because, if Ôrape is about power, not sexÕ, why would rapists just happen to target the age group that also just happens to be the most sexually desirable to men? 
And then thereÕs the age of the rapists themselves. This skew isnÕt quite as extreme as it is among female victims, but there is still a very clear peak among young men: one typical study found 46 per cent of rapists to be under age twenty-five, 17 per cent under age eighteen, and 15 per cent under age fifteen.32 
This fits not only with the age profile of violent offenders in general Ð who are overwhelmingly young men Ð but also with the peak of male sex drive.33 
Again, if Ôrape is about power, not sexÕ, why would this be the case? 
There was another issue I had been having doubts about when I first opened A Natural History of Rape. In victim surveys, the proportion of rape victims who are male is typically somewhere between 2 and 5 per cent, with almost all of these rapes committed by other men. It had occurred to me, while looking over the data, that this is about the same proportion of the male population that identifies as gay or bisexual Ð a coincidence, according to the Brownmiller model, but highly suggestive if we move beyond it, given that gay and bisexual men commit rape about as often as straight men do, but the victims of these rapists, of course, include other men and boys. Given this, should we still understand rape to be an expression of political dominance rooted in patriarchy, or should we instead consider a much more obvious possibility: that rape is an aggressive expression of sexual desire? 
Resistance to this research evidence comes from two very different groups, both of whom tend either to ignore the data or quibble with it, and often end up Ð perversely Ð echoing each other. The first is anti-feminist menÕs rights activists, and the second is those feminists who, in an effort to be as inclusive as possible, deliberately avoid making any generalisations about either rapists or their victims. While teaching workshops, a rape crisis colleague, for instance, used to use the phrase Ôpeople of all genders sexually assault people of all gendersÕ Ð a statement that is technically true, in the sense that you can find examples of every possible configuration of victim and perpetrator, but is misleading in its framing. 
In every part of the world, something in the region of 98 to 99 per cent of convicted sex offenders are male, and the women who make up the remaining 1 to 2 per cent typically offend quite differently. For instance, women are much more likely to offend alongside a male co-offender (usually a husband or boyfriend), and women almost never assault strangers. This is not to say that there are zero examples of women committing stranger rape or other male-typical crimes Ð in a world containing more than 7 billion people, rare events happen every day Ð but it is foolish to the point of dishonesty to pretend that 
there is not a very obvious pattern at play here. No, IÕm afraid that rape is a male crime, and not only in our species but also in many others. And it has evolved for a startlingly obvious reason: as Wrangham and Peterson put it, Ôrape has entered some speciesÕ behavioural repertoire because it can increase an individual maleÕs success in passing on genes to the next generation (as all evolved behaviours ultimately must).Õ34 
In other words, it is one method by which males can reproduce Ð it confers, in some situations, a selection advantage. 
This is the central thesis of A Natural History of Rape, a book that applies evolutionary theory to the task of understanding the causes of rape and the best methods of preventing it. We start from the recognition that reproduction places more physical demands on women than it does on men (sitting here writing this while six months pregnant, I can personally attest to this). Pregnancy lasts more than nine months and is followed by a dangerous labour, which is followed by many more years of breast-feeding and infant care. Men, however, really need to expend only the amount of effort it takes to orgasm in order to reproduce. It may also be advantageous for fathers to hang around after conception and increase the mother and babyÕs chances of survival, but it isnÕt always necessary: a man who can game the system by abandoning a woman after impregnating her, and then riding off into the sunset to impregnate many more women, is also successfully spreading his genetic material. He carries the risk of retribution, including violence from the womanÕs male kin, but in some instances the benefits may outweigh the risks. Put differently, there are different modes of male sexuality: the mode that encourages commitment and the mode that encourages promiscuity (much more on this in chapter 
4). 
When it was first published, A Natural History of Rape attracted a great deal of criticism from feminists, some of whom misrepresented the contents of the book.35 
Many critics misunderstood the argument that was being made or else refused to accept that Thornhill and Palmer were sincere in their condemnation of rape, despite the fact that the authors were at pains throughout the book to highlight the harm caused by rape and chose to dedicate the work to Ôthe women and girls in our livesÕ. 
Too few of these feminist critics recognised how useful the book could be in designing policies that actually work to prevent rape, and indeed in thinking more broadly about how a sexual culture might impact men and women differently. I strongly believe that this hostility to evolutionary biology is a mistake, which is why, in the rest of this book, IÕm regularly going to use the work of evolutionary biologists in the course of making feminist arguments Ð once we accept that men and women are different, many other things follow. 

How to bear it 
What proportion of men have the desire to rape? Not all, IÕm happy to report, although the proportion is still disturbingly high, as the evolutionary biologist David Buss writes: Individual men differ in their proclivity toward rape. In one study, men were asked to imagine that they had the possibility of forcing sex on someone else against her will with no chance of getting caught, no chance that anyone would find out, no risk of disease, and no possibility of damage to their reputation. Thirty-five percent indicated that there was some likelihood that they would force sex on the woman under these conditions, although in most cases the likelihood was slight. In another study that used a similar method, 27 percent of the men indicated that there was some likelihood that they would force sex on a woman if there was no chance of getting caught. Although these percentages are alarmingly high, if taken at face value they also indicate that most men are not potential rapists.36 

A smaller proportion of men admit to having actually committed rape, usually phrased in surveys as something like Ôforced an unwilling partner into sexÕ Ð in the United States and the UK, this figure hovers at around 10 per cent. In her work, the social psychologist and domestic abuse expert Dina McMillan also uses the figure of 10 per cent37 
as a rough ballpark for the proportion of the male population that are reliably dangerous. There is a core minority who will be sexually aggressive in most circumstances and a larger minority who will be sexually aggressive in some circumstances. This still means, thankfully, that the majority of men are not potential rapists Ð the infamous #NotAllMen hashtag is actually true. 
Unfortunately, itÕs not easy for potential victims to identify potential rapists. Thornhill and Palmer do point out that, as weÕd expect, Ôincarcerated rapists exhibit significantly more sexual arousal in 



precisely zero rapes, because rape is already illegal, and would-be rapists know that. We can scream ÔdonÕt rapeÕ until weÕre blue in the face, and it wonÕt make a blind bit of difference. 
It has to be possible to say simultaneously that rape is reprehensible and that it is OK Ð in fact, essential Ð to offer advice that could help to reduce its incidence. I could hardly have more contempt for rapists Ð I joke with my friends that I want to market a range of tiny guillotines to deal with rapists in a very direct manner Ð and yet IÕm exhausted by a feminist discourse that canÕt move beyond just saying over and over again that rape is bad. Yes, rape is bad. We know that. Now letÕs actually do something about it. 
There are two ways of reducing rape. The first is to constrain would-be rapists, for instance by imprisoning them, and the second is to limit opportunities for them to act on their desires. Prosecution rates for sexual crimes are appallingly low in every part of the world Ð in the UK, less than 1 per cent of rapes result in a conviction Ð which is partly due to low reporting rates, partly due to failures within the criminal justice system, and partly due to the fact that it is inherently difficult to prosecute rape committed by anyone other than a stranger and against anyone other than a child. ItÕs always going to be challenging to prove beyond reasonable doubt the presence or absence of consent, even in a perfect system, and we donÕt have one of those. 
I would like convicted rapists to spend much longer in prison Ð their whole lives, if needs be Ð because I have very little faith in the effectiveness of sex offender rehabilitation programmes. One such programme, run in prisons in England and Wales for more than a decade, was actually found to slightly increase rates of reoffending.42 
My perspective on this is often condemned as Ôcarceral feminismÕ by those who favour the abolition of prisons and policing, typically on the grounds of racial justice. My response to this accusation is that the women and children who make up the vast majority of rape victims are disproportionately likely to be both poor and non-white. If wanting to protect these potential victims from violence makes me a Ôcarceral feministÕ, then I wear the label with pride. 
The feminists who describe me as ÔcarceralÕ are able to present only one alternative to imprisonment: resocialisation, typically attempted through consent workshops for children and young adults. IÕve both designed and taught these workshops and I donÕt think theyÕre entirely useless, because they can achieve two things: they can teach participants (including potential victims) what is and is not illegal, and they can offer schools or other institutions the opportunity to declare a zero tolerance attitude. If, for instance, a student is caught sharing revenge porn having attended an official consent workshop, he or she canÕt plausibly claim not to have known that this was both illegal and punishable by expulsion. 
However, consent workshops are very unlikely to prevent rape, because rape is not caused by a lack of education. Hundreds of thousands of years of sexual violence Ð not only in our own species but also in many others Ð is not a consequence of some kind of misunderstanding, swiftly cleared up during a 45-minute workshop in which kids are told in words of one syllable not to rape one another. Nurture does have a role to play: as weÕll see in chapter 
5, for instance, there is good reason to believe that violent porn can intensify an existing arousal pattern. But putting oneÕs faith in resocialisation is not only foolish but dangerous. 
If we accept the evidence from evolutionary biology and move beyond the Brownmiller model, then we can understand that rapists are really just men who are aroused by violence, have poor impulse control, and are presented with a suitable victim and a suitable set of circumstances. Those circumstances can include a victim who is drunk, high, or otherwise vulnerable, the absence of witnesses, and no fear of any legal or social repercussions. Both women and men in the sex trade are spectacularly vulnerable (much more on this in later chapters). And young women between the ages of about thirteen and twenty-five are the prime group likely to be targeted. 
If you wanted to design the perfect environment for the would-be rapist, then you couldnÕt do much better than a party or nightclub filled with young women who are wearing high heels (limiting mobility) and drinking or taking drugs (limiting awareness). Is it appalling for a person even to contemplate assaulting these women? Yes. Does that moral statement provide any protection to these women whatsoever? No. I made this mistake many, many times as a young woman, and I understand the cultural pressure. But, while young women should feel free to get hammered with their girlfriends or highly trusted men, doing so among strange men will always be risky. 
I think we all know this, just as we all know that itÕs risky for young women to hitch-hike, travel alone, or go back to a strange manÕs house. The sorry truth is that something in the region of 10 per cent of men pose a risk, and those men arenÕt always identifiable on first sight, or even after long acquaintance. So my advice to young women has to be this: avoid putting yourself in a situation where you are alone with a man you donÕt know or a man who gives you a bad feeling in your gut. He is almost certainly stronger and faster than you, which means that the only thing standing between you and rape is that manÕs self-control. I know full well that this advice doesnÕt protect against all forms of rape, including (but not limited to) incestuous rape, prison rape, child rape and marital rape. I wish I could offer some advice to protect against these atrocities, but I canÕt. 
Other feminists can gnash their teeth all they like, accuse me of victim blaming, and insist that the burden should be on rapists, not their victims, to prevent rape. But they have no other solutions to offer, since feeble efforts at resocialisation donÕt actually work. What does sometimes work is a solution that is unreliable, unfair and painfully, painfully costly: to reduce the opportunities available to would-be rapists and to imprison those who either cannot or will not resist their aggressive sexual impulses. Because rape isnÕt only about power, itÕs also about sex. 

Notes 
1. 
Randy Thornhill and Craig T. Palmer, A Natural History of Rape: Biological Bases of Sexual Coercion. Chicago: MIT Press, 2000. 


13. 
A. E. Miller, J. D. MacDougall, M. A. Tarnopolsky and D. G. Sale, ÔGender differences in strength and muscle fiber characteristicsÕ, 
European Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology 66 (1993): 254Ð62. 
14. 

Tal Amasay, Constance M. Mier, Katelyn K. Foley and Tonya L. Carswell, ÔGender differences in performance of equivalently loaded push-up and bench-press exercisesÕ, Journal of Sport 5 (2016): 46Ð63. 

15. 

Paul Gabrielsen, ÔWhy males pack a powerful punchÕ, 5 February 2020, https://phys.org/news/2020-02-males-powerful.html. 

16. 

D. Leyk, W. Gorges, D. Ridder et al., ÔHand-grip strength of young men, women and highly trained female athletesÕ, European Journal of Applied Physiology 99 (2007): 415Ð21. 

17. 

Robinson Meyer, 7 August 2012, www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/08/the-golden.
ratio-the-one-number-that-describes-how-mens-world-records.
compare-with-womens/260758/. 


18. 

See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CARIFTA_Games#Boys_Under_1 
7. 


19. 

See 
www.truthorfiction.com/was-the-u-s-womens-national.
team-defeated-by-teenaged-boys-in-a-2017-soccer-match/. 



20. 
See 
www.newstatesman.com/politics/sport/2016/07/olympics.
one-question-will-hang-over-female-athletes-are-you-real.

woman. 

21. 

ÔDame Kelly Holmes, Paula Radcliffe and Sharron Davies to write to IOC over transgender athletesÕ, 18 March 2019, www.bbc.co.uk/sport/47608623. 

22. 

Sean Ingle, 3 March 2019, https://www.theguardian.com/society/2019/mar/03/sports.
stars-weigh-in-on-row-over-transgender-athletes. 


23. 

Aaron Sell, Aaron W. Lukazsweski and Michael Townsley, ÔCues of upper body strength account for most of the variance in menÕs bodily attractivenessÕ, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 284 (2017), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspb.2017.1819. 


24. 

ÔGoogleÕs ideological echo chamberÕ, July 2017, https://web.archive.org/web/20170809021151/https://diversity 
memo.com/. 

25. 

Paul Lewis, ÔI see things differentlyÕ, 17 November 2017, www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/nov/16/james-damore.
google-memo-interview-autism-regrets. 


26. 

ÔGoogleÕs ideological echo chamberÕ. 

27. 

See www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTHgMxQEoPI. 

28. 

Camilla Turner, 26 November 2020, www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/11/26/exclusive-eton-college.
dismisses-teacher-amid-free-speech-row/. 





40. 

ÔSussex Police defends Òvictim blamingÓ campaign posterÕ, 8 April 2015, www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-sussex-32216176. 


41. 

See 
www.change.org/p/sussex-police-withdraw-your-rape.
prevention-posters-which-blames-victims-of-sexual-assault. 


42. 

ÔSex offender treatment scheme led to increase in reoffendingÕ, 30 
June 
2017, 
www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jun/30/sex.
offenders-on-group-treatment-programme-more-likely-to.
reoffend. 





Some Desires Are Bad 
The American social psychologist Jonathan Haidt likes to invent scenarios that test our moral intuitions. He will ask research participants to listen to a story, give their opinion on it, and then explain their reasoning. Here is one such scenario: imagine a man goes to a supermarket and buys himself a whole dead chicken. He takes it home, has sex with it, and then eats it. No one else ever finds out. Did he do anything wrong? 
Haidt has several other scenarios concerned with sexual ethics. Is it OK for a brother and sister to have sex, if they use multiple forms of contraception, and no one else knows about it? Or, to use a real scenario, is it OK for a man to consent to being eaten by another man for the purposes of sexual gratification?1 
He has found that participantsÕ responses tend to be affected by their political allegiances. Social conservatives generally give swift, confident answers, because they are able to appeal to values such as sanctity and authority. For them, having sex with a dead chicken or a sibling obviously violates religious or traditionalist moral principles and is therefore unacceptable. End of story. 
Liberals have more difficulty: they want to say that the acts are wrong, because they are instinctively disgusted by them, but the scenarios are designed to prevent any appeal to J. S. MillÕs harm principle: ÔThe only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.Õ In the chicken example, for instance, it is difficult to identify anyone who has been harmed by the manÕs behaviour, since the chicken, being dead, canÕt be harmed, and other people, being ignorant of the act, canÕt be harmed either. The man is simply exercising his sexual autonomy, which means that, as Haidt puts it, Ôif your moral matrix is limited to the ethic of autonomy, then youÕre at high risk of being dumbfounded by this case.Õ 
Not everyone is dumbfounded, though. The American anthropologist Gayle Rubin, for instance Ð a key figure in the academic discipline of Queer Theory, which emerged in the 1970s and 1980s Ð would, I imagine, be unbothered by the chicken scenario, just as she is unbothered by unusual sexual behaviour in general. As she writes: 
In Western culture, sex is taken all too seriously. A person is not 
considered immoral, is not sent to prison, and is not expelled 
from her or his family, for enjoying spicy cuisine. But an 
individual may go through all this and more for enjoying shoe 
leather. Ultimately, of what possible social significance is it if a 
person likes to masturbate over a shoe?2 

Rubin is radical in her liberalism. She famously rejects the idea of ÔgoodÕ or ÔbadÕ sexual behaviour, interpreting such moralising as inherently oppressive. To her mind, sex does not need to involve either love or commitment, and it certainly neednÕt have any connection to marriage or reproduction. The only thing that matters to liberal feminists such as Rubin is whether or not all parties are able and willing to consent to a particular sex act. All other sexual morality must be discarded Ð indeed, one group that was influential early on in arguing for the destigmatisation of commercial sex made the point crystal clear with their choice of name: COYOTE, ÔCall Off Your Old Tired EthicsÕ. 
RubinÕs Queer Theory owed a great debt to Michel FoucaultÕs History of Sexuality, the first volume of which was published in 1978. And Foucault, in his turn, owed a great debt to Sigmund FreudÕs writing on sexual repression. This intellectual tradition is interpreted by its proponents as a progressive undermining of bourgeois sexual norms, which have historically functioned to keep people with unusual sexual interests either locked out of respectable society or else made permanently unhappy when they are forced to hide their authentic sexual selves. The famous slogan of the May 1968 student protests in Paris, ÔIl est interdit dÕinterdire!Õ (It is forbidden to forbid), makes the point succinctly and has become remarkably mainstream in the decades since, jumbled up with the feminist attempt to free women from traditional sexual norms that restricted female agency and pleasure. Thus the cause of Foucault, Rubin, Freud, and womankind as a whole is assumed by liberal feminism to be one and the same: ÔusÕ (the revolutionaries) against ÔthemÕ (the traditionalists). LibertŽ, ƒgalitŽ, SexualitŽ! 
But I want to suggest a different framing Ð a class struggle, but not between the revolutionaries and the traditionalists but between two very different classes of people, with two very different sets of interests. 
The sexual free market 
Critics of free market capitalism have correctly observed that, within a society riven by gross inequalities of wealth and power, the pleasures of freedom are not equally available to all. As the economic historian and socialist R. H. Tawney wrote in 1931: 
Equality implies the deliberate acceptance of social restraints upon individual expansion. It involves the prevention of sensational extremes of wealth and power by public action for the public good. If liberty means, therefore, that every individual shall be free, according to his opportunities, to indulge without limit his appetite for either, it is clearly incompatible, not only with economic and social, but with civil and political, equality, which also prevent the strong exploiting to the full the advantages of their strength É freedom for the pike is death for the minnows.3 

Of course the factory owner supports free marketisation, and of course his wage slave disagrees Ð the pike and the minnow have different economic interests. This is also true in the sexual marketplace, which was once strictly regulated but has now been made (mostly) free. 
However, in this case, the classes are not the workers and the bourgeoisie but, rather, men and women Ð or, more precisely, the group of people who have done particularly well out of the free marketisation of sex are men high in the personality trait that psychologists call ÔsociosexualityÕ: the desire for sexual variety. 
The psychologist David Schmitt describes the importance of 
sociosexuality: Those who score relatively low on this dimension are said to possess a restricted sociosexual orientation Ð they tend toward monogamy, prolonged courtship, and heavy emotional investment in long-term relationships. Those residing at the high end of sociosexuality are considered more unrestricted in mating orientation, they tend toward promiscuity, are quick to have sex, and experience lower levels of romantic relationship closeness.4 

In a study of male and female sociosexuality across forty-eight countries, Schmitt and his team found large sex differences to be Ôa cultural universalÕ, regardless of a nationÕs level of economic and social equality between the sexes. Although there is of course variation within the sexes, with some individual women high in sociosexuality and some individual men low in it, the two bell curves are substantially different. This difference is explained by what evolutionary biologists term Ôparental investment theoryÕ Ð put simply, women can produce offspring at a maximum rate of about one pregnancy per year, whereas promiscuous men can theoretically produce offspring every time they orgasm. Although there are some limited circumstances in which multiple short-term mating might be advantageous for women Ð in conditions of danger and scarcity, for instance, in which sex might be exchanged for resources and protection Ð in general, natural selection has favoured women who are choosy about their mates. 
We see this play out in male and female sexual behaviour. The research is clear: we know that men, on average, prefer to have more sex and with a larger number of partners, that sex buyers are almost exclusively male, that men watch a lot more porn than women do, and that the vast majority of women, if given the option, prefer a committed relationship to casual sex. Sexual fetishes (also known as ÔparaphiliasÕ) are also much more commonly found in men than in women and, although the cause of this difference is not well understood, menÕs greater average sociosexuality seems to be a factor.5 
All in all, the evidence demonstrates that the acts that have become much more socially acceptable over the last sixty years are acts that men are much more likely to enjoy. It is a good time to be a fetishist, a sex buyer, a porn user and a playboy Ð it is the highly sociosexual who have done best out of sexual liberalism, and these people are overwhelmingly male. 
There have also been other beneficiaries of sexual liberalisation Ð most importantly, lesbian, gay and bisexual people, whose relationships are now, for the first time, not only decriminalised but also granted state recognition in many countries. The decline in homophobia across the West within the last century is truly remarkable. In 1983, fully half of respondents told the British Social Attitudes Survey that Ôsexual relations between adults of the same sexÕ were Ôalways wrongÕ.6 
By 2012, this proportion had more than halved, and, a year later, legislation introducing same-sex marriage in England and Wales was passed under a Conservative government. Since 2001, dozens of other countries have legalised same-sex marriage, including the United States in 20157 
Ð a prospect that was almost unthinkable at the height of the AIDS crisis in 1989, when Andrew Sullivan was the first to make the case for this reform in a prominent American publication.8 


Any historical event as radical as the sexual revolution is going to have a diverse range of effects, both positive and negative, but the key point I want to stress in this book is that it is wrong to interpret this historical period as an example of ÔprogressÕ in any straightforward sense. I am a ÔprogressÕ apostate: I do not believe that there is any such thing as the gradual, inevitable marching towards the good that Martin Luther King Junior so famously described as the Ôarc of the moral universeÕ bending towards justice. Every social change has trade-offs, which are obscured by a simplistic narrative that leaves no space for complexity. 
Sex is relational. This means, of course, that the loving partner needs another loving partner. But this also means that the fetishist with a taste for sadomasochism, voyeurism or dirty underwear needs other people to participate in his fetish, just as the sex buyer needs sex sellers and the porn user needs porn producers. This isnÕt a problem for a theorist such as Gayle Rubin, who would point out that plenty of people (mostly, by necessity, women) are available to provide for these desires Ð sometimes readily, sometimes in return for financial compensation. But this underestimates the extent to which participants in the sexual free market may be subjected to more or less subtle coercion, just as workers in an economic system act in response to incentives and constraints. 
Rubin and her allies would no doubt be appalled by any association between themselves and the British prime minister Margaret Thatcher, but their approach to sexual ethics is nicely summed up by ThatcherÕs declaration, during a 1987 interview, that ÔthereÕs no such thing as society.Õ The phrase has since become notorious in British politics, often interpreted by ThatcherÕs critics as expressive of a greedy and often brutal individualism that she is taken to represent. Despite her party allegiance, Thatcher was not a conservative with a small ÔcÕ because she did not seek to conserve. She deliberately pursued a process of creative destruction, stripping out the old to make way for the new. Her supporters insist that this was a necessity 
Ð that the coal mining industry, for instance, had no more life left in it Ð but her critics point out that the disruption brought about by her aggressive interventions has led to long-term misery, particularly in areas of Britain that are now post-industrial, and that this misery ultimately led to the further disruption heralded by the Brexit referendum of 2016. 
Thatcher did not obey G. K. ChestertonÕs directive, laid out in this famous passage: In the matter of reforming things, as distinct from deforming them, there is one plain and simple principle; a principle which will probably be called a paradox. There exists in such a case a certain institution or law; let us say, for the sake of simplicity, a fence or gate erected across a road. The more modern type of reformer goes gaily up to it and says, ÔI donÕt see the use of this; let us clear it away.Õ To which the more intelligent type of reformer will do well to answer: ÔIf you donÕt see the use of it, I certainly wonÕt let you clear it away. Go away and think. Then, when you can come back and tell me that you do see the use of it, I may allow you to destroy it.Õ9 

Chesterton points out that the person who doesnÕt understand the purpose of a social institution is the last person who should be allowed to reform it. The world is big and dynamic Ð so much so that literally no one is capable of fully understanding it or predicting how its systems might respond to change. The parable of ÔChestertonÕs FenceÕ ought to encourage caution in would-be reformers, because there is such a thing as society, and it is more complex than any of us can fathom. 
But the sexual Thatcherites do not recognise the delicate and relational nature of a sexual culture and therefore cannot see that society is composed of both pikes and minnows, as well as people who may play both roles at different times (Ôhalf victim, half accompliceÕ, as Simone de Beauvoir put it). Their analysis can only understand people as freewheeling, atomised individuals, all out looking out for number one and all up for a good time. Thus when they see a taboo Ð against, say, having sex with chicken corpses Ð they assume that, if no obvious purpose for the taboo springs to mind, it must therefore be unnecessary. They falsely assume that, with all such taboos removed, then we would all be liberated and capable of making entirely free choices about our sexual lives, sampling from a menu of delightful options made newly available by the sexual revolution (ÔWhat will sir have today Ð the chicken?Õ). 
But in fact our choices are severely constrained, not only because we are impressionable creatures who absorb the values and ideas of our surrounding culture but also because sex is a social activity: it requires the involvement of other people. If I am, for instance, a young female student looking for a boyfriend at my twenty-first.century university, and I donÕt want to have sex before marriage, then I will find my options limited in a way that they wouldnÕt have been seventy years ago. When sex before marriage is expected, and when almost all of the other women participating in my particular sexual market are willing to Ôput outÕ on a first or second date, then not being willing to do the same becomes a competitive disadvantage. The abstinent young woman must either be tremendously attractive, in order to out-compete her more permissive peers, or she must be happy to restrict her dating pool only to those men who are as unusual as she is. Being eccentric carries costs. 
The ÔprogressÕ narrative disguises the challenge of interconnectedness by presenting history as a simple upward trajectory, with all of us becoming steadily more free as old-fashioned restrictions are surmounted. But there is another way of understanding history Ð a way that is perhaps less reassuring but which is able to incorporate the inevitable fact of conflict and trade-offs. 

The wrong side of history 
We should reject the progress narrative, looking instead to those such as the Marxist critic Raymond Williams who remind us that societies are always in a state of flux. At any one time, Williams writes, there will be dominant, residual and emergent cultural elements existing simultaneously and in tension with one another.10 
We tend to celebrate those historical figures who were part of emergent strains that later became dominant: the people credited with being ahead of their time and later vindicated, sometimes only (and most romantically) in death. But we usually pay less attention to the people who found themselves part of residual elements that may once have been dominant but eventually faded away. We venerate the people whose ideologies won out, perhaps imagining ourselves to be among their number. We think a lot less about the people who lost. 
The infamous campaigner Mary Whitehouse is one of historyÕs losers. Born in 1910, she never let go of her Edwardian sensibilities, even as the society she knew collapsed around her ears. She spent thirty-seven years organising letter-writing campaigns in an effort to halt the arrival of what she called the Ôpermissive societyÕ, horrified as she was by the displays of sex and violence that suddenly appeared on British television screens from the 1960s onwards. A contemporary of WhitehouseÕs described her in the Financial Times 
as a Ôlittle Canute, exhorting the waves of moral turpitude to retreatÕ.11 
She didnÕt campaign for change, she campaigned for stasis. And she failed utterly, in a grand display of public humiliation. 
Some of WhitehouseÕs concerns look rather silly now. She and her fellow campaigners expended a huge amount of energy on the kind of sauciness that nowadays seems quaint. The double entendres in songs such as Chuck BerryÕs ÔMy Ding-a-LingÕ and sitcoms such as It AinÕt Half Hot Mum all provoked letters, as did a suggestively placed microphone during Mick JaggerÕs appearance on Top of the Pops. 
One of WhitehouseÕs first forays into public life was an anonymous 1953 piece for the Sunday Times that advised mothers on how best to inhibit homosexuality in their sons. This open homophobia was combined with a crusade against blasphemy that often called upon archaic legislation. In 1977, she pursued a private prosecution against Gay News for printing a poem that described a Roman centurion fantasising about having sex with the body of the crucified Christ. The editor was convicted of blasphemous libel, and the QC who represented him later wrote that WhitehouseÕs Ôfear of homosexuals was visceralÕ Ð he may well have been right.12 

Her reputation as a bigoted fuddy-duddy means that, if Whitehouse is remembered now, it is usually as a punchline. And indeed in her own lifetime she was the subject of constant ridicule. One of her books was ritually burned on a BBC sitcom, her name was used in jest as the title of the hit comedy show The Mary Whitehouse Experience, and a porn star mockingly changed her name to ÔMary WhitehouseÕ by deed poll (this second Mary Whitehouse later committed suicide). Sir Hugh Greene, director general of the BBC between 1960 and 1969, openly despised Whitehouse, so much so that he purchased a grotesque naked portrait of her to hang in his office. The story goes that Greene would vent his frustration by throwing darts at the portrait, squealing with delight if he managed to hit one of WhitehouseÕs six breasts.13 


Arch-progressive Owen Jones, columnist at The Guardian, is among those who now use WhitehouseÕs name as short-hand for being on the Ôwrong side of historyÕ (a phrase Jones often employs).14 
Such a framing presents Whitehouse as villainy incarnate, set against the romantic heroes of Raymond WilliamsÕs emergent strain Ð in this case, Sir Hugh Greene and his permissive allies. But this historical narrative only works if one is deliberately selective. Whitehouse has found herself condemned by ÔhistoryÕ on the issues of homosexuality, blasphemy, and the phallic use of microphones on Top of the Pops. But on one issue she was remarkably prescient: Whitehouse was one of the few public figures of her day who gave a damn about child sexual abuse. 
At the same time that Sir Hugh Greene was lobbing darts at WhitehouseÕs naked portrait, his organisation was enabling abuses perpetrated against women and children by many famous men, including Ð most notoriously Ð the TV presenter Jimmy Savile. It was only after Savile died, unpunished, in 2011 that the scale of his crimes became clear. It is now believed that, over the course of at least forty years, BBC staff turned a blind eye to the rape and sexual assault of up to 1,000 girls and boys by Savile in the corporationÕs changing rooms and studios.15 
He abused many more victims, young and old, male and female, in hospitals, schools, and anywhere else he could seek them out. SavileÕs celebrity status enabled his sexual aggression, allowing him access to vulnerable victims, particularly children, and discouraging investigation. 
Savile made little effort to conceal what he got up to, and indeed would often joke about it. Answering the phone to journalists, he would apparently greet them, unprompted, with the phrase ÔShe told me she was over sixteenÕ, invariably met with nervous laughter.16 
In his autobiography, published in 1974, Savile openly admitted to some of his crimes, for instance writing of a time, before he became a TV presenter, when he had been running nightclubs in the north of England and a police officer asked him to look out for a young girl who had run away from a home for juvenile offenders. Savile told the officer that, if the girl showed up at one of his clubs, he would be sure to hand her over to the authorities Ð Ôbut IÕll keep her all night first as my reward.Õ The girl did show up at one of his clubs, and he did spend the night with her, but no criminal action was ever taken.17 
Savile told this story openly, as if it were funny, and seemingly without fear of consequences. 
When the Savile scandal broke in the early 2010s, the same refrain was repeated by commentators again and again: ÔIt was a different time.Õ18 
And indeed it was, although we sometimes forget quite how different attitudes towards child sexual abuse really were during the 1970s and 1980s. In Britain, members of the Paedophile Information Exchange were openly campaigning for the abolition of the age of consent and found themselves welcomed warmly in some establishment circles, with Margaret ThatcherÕs government refusing demands to ban the group.19 
In the United States, NAMBLA (the ÔNorth American Man Boy Love AssociationÕ) was founded at the end of the 1970s and attracted support from figures including the poet Allen Ginsberg and the feminist Camille Paglia.20 

In some European countries at this time, child pornography was freely available, having been legalised at the same time as other forms of pornography from the end of the 1960s.21 
In Sweden, for instance, it emerged in 2009 that the Royal Library in Stockholm was in possession of a collection of child pornography acquired (legally) between 1971 and 1980 and still being loaned (illegally) to members of the public into the twenty-first century22 
Ð an uncomfortable reminder of SwedenÕs hyper-liberal past. 
In 1977, a petition to the French parliament calling for the decriminalisation of sex between adults and children was signed by a long list of famous intellectuals, including Jean-Paul Sartre, Jacques Derrida, Louis Althusser, Roland Barthes, Simone de Beauvoir, Gilles Deleuze, FŽlix Guattari and Ð that esteemed radical and father of Queer Theory Ð Michel Foucault.23 
In 2021, the writer Guy Sorman alleged in an interview with The Times that Foucault had also acted on this political principle, sexually abusing children aged between about eight and ten during the period when he lived in Tunisia in the late 1960s. Sorman claimed that this fact was known to his fellow journalists, Ôbut nobody did stories like that in those days. Foucault was the philosopher king. HeÕs like our god in France.Õ24 

All of these figures now find themselves (as Owen Jones would term it) on Ôthe wrong side of historyÕ, since the 1990s saw a sharp swing back against efforts to normalise paedophilia. During the 1970s it was primarily ÔregressiveÕ conservatives who opposed groups such as the Paedophile Information Exchange, with Mary Whitehouse, for instance, lobbying hard for the private memberÕs bill that became the Protection of Children Act 1978. Eventually, Whitehouse was joined by progressives in her condemnation of child sexual abuse, but her contribution was erased and the shameful history of the liberal tolerance for paedophilia in the decades following the sexual revolution was mostly forgotten, to be rediscovered, piecemeal, during investigations such as the one into Jimmy Savile. 
Paedophilia is now condemned by liberals and conservatives alike, alongside a clutch of other paraphilias, including necrophilia and bestiality. For liberals, the wall between licit and illicit sexual behaviour is now built upon an emphasis on consent, which IÕll explore in greater depth in the coming chapters. The problem with paedophilia, according to this argument, is that children canÕt consent, and therefore any sexual activity involving them will always be unacceptable. Thus, if the paedophilia apologism of sexual revolutionaries such as Foucault and Rubin is remembered at all, it is as a brief and embarrassing detour from the progressive path Ð a kink (so to speak) in the arc of the moral universeÕs bend towards justice. 
But, upon closer scrutiny, the consent argument falls apart. Liberals may be able to accept the banning of child porn without any qualms, since it necessitates the abuse of real children in its production, but what about images that the police term Ôpseudo-photographsÕ that appear to depict real children? What about illustrations? What about adults dressing up and pretending to be children during sex? What about porn performers who appear to be very young? What about porn performers who deliberately make themselves look even younger? What about Belle Delphine, the 21-year-old social media star, who sells pornographic images of herself wearing braces and girlish clothes and in 2021 was criticised for sharing images of herself seemingly dressed as a child and pretending to be raped by a man dressed as a kidnapper? Defending herself against her critics, Delphine insisted: ÔI am not apologising for anything, what I did wasnÕt wrong, and much more normal than people think. Look at one of the most common sexual outfits and fantasies, schoolgirl. If you wear that are you promoting paedophilia now?Õ25 

Within the liberal framework, how can we respond to DelphineÕs question with the answer that, for most of us, is intuitive: ÔYes, schoolgirl fantasies do promote paedophiliaÕ? An ethical system based solely on consent does not allow space for this kind of moral intuition, which puts liberals into an awkward position, as Jonathan HaidtÕs research has shown. It is difficult to invoke J. S. MillÕs harm principle when faced with a wide range of alarming sexual scenarios: consensual incest, cannibalism, sex with dead chickens, and sex acts that are at the very least paedophilic-adjacent, if not outright paedophilic. 
Breaking taboos 
When you set out to break down sexual taboos, you shouldnÕt be surprised when all taboos are considered fair game for breaking, including the ones youÕd rather retain. The claim from Foucault and his allies was never that violently coercing children into sex is OK. Rather, they claimed that sexual desire develops earlier in some children than in others and that it is therefore possible in some cases for children to have sexual relationships with adults that are not only not traumatic but mutually enjoyable. The claim, therefore, was not that consent is unimportant but, rather, that children are sometimes capable of consenting. And they pointed out, correctly, that paedophiles are a maligned sexual minority who suffer greatly as a result of the taboo maintained against them. Their project, therefore, was not a detour from the progressive path but in fact logically in keeping with it. The principles of sexual liberalism do, IÕm sorry to say, trundle inexorably towards this endpoint, whether or not we want them to. 
And, indeed, after the intense backlash against paedophilia advocacy in the 1990s and early 2000s, we are now starting to see some slippage back towards the thinking of the 1970s. In 2020, Netflix released a film called Cuties (originally Mignonnes), written and directed by the French-Senegalese filmmaker Ma•mouna DoucourŽ. The protagonist is eleven-year-old Amy, who lives with her Senegalese family in a poor district of Paris. When AmyÕs father announces his intention to take a second wife, Amy and her mother are heartbroken, and the rupture pushes Amy away from her conservative religious community and into the orbit of a group of girls who call themselves the Cuties. 
The Cuties are not nice girls. They bully Amy and each other, they physically attack other children, they steal, they lie, and they also twerk. Aged eleven, they have formed an amateur dance troupe and adopted skimpy outfits and a gyrating style that is a world away from anything Amy has experienced before. The girls arenÕt directly groomed by anyone, and in fact we never see any overt acts of sexual aggression. They learn to grind and pout via the internet, particularly a social media marketplace in which pre-teen sexualisation is well rewarded with likes and follows. In one scene, Amy sits among older women in prayer, while under her veil she furtively watches video on her stolen smartphone of adult women slapping each otherÕs naked buttocks. Thrilled by the aesthetic, Amy teaches the other girls to add more explicit moves to their routine, and in one particularly unwatchable scene the children encourage each other to jiggle their tiny backsides and hump the floor in an imitation of pornified ecstasy. 
This scene goes on forever, as do half a dozen other similar scenes, one of which was widely shared online when the film became a crucial wedge issue in an international culture war Ð so much so that #CancelNetflix trended on Twitter on and off for weeks, and some American Republicans demanded that Netflix executives face a criminal investigation for, as Representative Jim Banks put it, Ôdistribution of child pornographyÕ.26 
Both Netflix and DoucourŽ defended the film by pointing out that it was intended as a commentary on the harms of child sexualisation. The problem was that it also featured a lot of actual child sexualisation, and the original marketing for the film played on this theme, with the four very young actresses dressed in glorified bikinis and arranged in suggestive poses. Gritty depictions of child sexualisation are not entirely new. Taxi Driver (1976), Pretty Babies (1978) and Thirteen (2003) all portrayed pre-pubescent girls in sexually inappropriate scenarios. But Cuties went further than any of these films in not only suggesting sexualisation but actually showing it, and at length. 
Nevertheless, Cuties received positive reviews in outlets including the Washington Post, Rolling Stone, the New Yorker and The Telegraph,27 
whose critic praised this act of provocation in Ôan age terrified of child sexualityÕ and later tweeted his delight that the film had Ôpissed off all the right peopleÕ. The word ÔhystericalÕ recurred in these reviews, alongside the suggestion that the outrage over Cuties was wholly disproportionate, derived solely from a conservative moral panic over paedophilia. 
There is something about paedophilia anxiety that is currently considered rather low status among the liberal elites. It is associated, particularly in America, with sinister groups such as QAnon and, particularly in Britain, with the tabloid newspapers. In 2000, Yvette Cloete, a thirty-year-old South African working as a trainee paediatrician in the Welsh county of Gwent, came home to find the word ÔPaedoÕ painted on her front door. Police believed this to have been the work of local teenagers. Cloete gave a couple of interviews to the press in which she suggested that the vandals might have confused the word ÔpaediatricianÕ with ÔpaedophileÕ, and the story took off, eventually becoming an urban legend. Among my peers, I have several times heard a version in which a local mob, whipped up by an anti-paedophilia campaign in the News of the World, physically attacks the paediatrician and even burns her house to the ground. As the journalist Brendan OÕNeill wrote in 2010, the incident Ôhas been transformed by opinion-formers into proof that some communities are so dumb, morally bereft and easily swayed by paedophile-baiting tabloids like the News of the World that they end up confusing a good woman who helps children with evil men who rape them.Õ28 

The story was popularised and distorted because it scratched a certain itch for snobbish progressives, presenting anti-paedophilia anxiety as an obsession of the ignorant and credulous working classes, a group very much considered to be on Ôthe wrong side of historyÕ. But, while it is certainly true that the conspiracy theories generated by groups such as QAnon are false, it is also true that there have been some shocking examples of child sexual abuse taking place at scale and without detection. Jimmy Savile abusing up to a thousand children on BBC premises would sound like a conspiracy theory if we didnÕt know it to be true, just as Jeffrey Epstein supplying underage girls to famous and powerful men sounds like particularly bizarre fiction. And yet these things really happened. 

The virtue of repression 
In an episode of The Simpsons called ÔI Am Furious (Yellow)Õ, first aired in 2002, Homer Simpson decides to become a less angry person. Every time Homer finds himself feeling angry, he represses the emotion, and a lump appears on his neck. Soon enough, HomerÕs neck is covered in lumps and his calm demeanour is becoming increasingly fragile. At the end of the episode, Bart and Milhouse play a prank on Homer, and all of this repressed anger is suddenly released in an uncontrolled rampage. Later in hospital, the doctor informs the Simpson family that HomerÕs attempts at emotional repression could have proved lethal since, without the opportunity for release, Ôthe anger wouldÕve overwhelmed his nervous system.Õ Repression, it seems, is not only difficult but also dangerous. 
This is a comical representation of a particular understanding of Freud that is popular in the contemporary West and which is applied to sexual repression just as much as to emotional repression. This model understands sexual desire to be a fixed quantity which must be periodically released, either through actual intercourse or through some other kind of Ôsafety valveÕ, such as porn. 
The problem with this model is that it does not recognise the necessity of sexual repression. Even in a post-1960s sexual free market, the law often requires us to repress our sexual impulses. If you want to have sex with someone, but they either wonÕt or canÕt consent, then the law obliges you to repress your desire. You are also forbidden from having sex with an animal or having sex with a corpse, and, in England and Wales, as well as in most other jurisdictions, you canÕt legally watch porn that features bestiality or necrophilia. WhatÕs more, you may risk imprisonment if you masturbate or have sex in a public place, a fact that outrages the Queer Theorist Pat Califia, who asks: Why is sex supposed to be invisible? Other pleasurable acts or acts of communication are routinely performed in public Ð eating, drinking, talking, watching movies, writing letters, studying or teaching, telling jokes and laughing, appreciating fine art. Is sex so deadly, hateful, and horrific that we canÕt permit it to be seen? Are naked bodies so ugly or so shameful that we canÕt survive the sight of bare tushes or genitals without withering away?29 

Unfortunately for Califia, public opinion has not aligned with this particular act of taboo-breaking. Every society requires that some kinds of sexual impulse be repressed Ð what varies is where exactly the line is drawn. 
The word ÔVictorianÕ is often used in association with sexual repression, most likely because, in the historical pendulum swing back and forth on the issue of licentiousness, Victorian Britain is our most recent example of an intense swing towards the prudish. Although, as revisionist historians such as Matthew Sweet have pointed out, the popular characterisation of the Victorians as scandalised by unclothed table legs is not quite true,30 
and this was in fact a society riven with contradictions Ð for instance combining a sometimes sickeningly sentimental attitude towards children with widespread child prostitution and, until 1875, an age of consent set at just twelve. 
But there is no doubt that the Victorians did indeed set the repressive bar higher than we now do, and that this resulted in terrible cruelties, primarily against gay men and unmarried mothers. Sexual repression is a blunt instrument, but it is not one we can do away with altogether, as the errors of the 1970s show. The radical desires of sexual liberals do not work in a world in which human sexuality is not always beautiful but often wicked and repulsive. The desire to free the minnows is a good one, but reckless action can result in freedom for the pikes as well. In an interconnected society, the one impacts the other. 
But the progressive narrative disguises this truth and, in doing so, does terrible harm to the minnows: that is, the people who have been offered up as sacrifices to the cause of sexual freedom. A society that prioritises the desires of the highly sociosexual is necessarily one that prioritises the desires of men, given the natural distribution of this trait, and those men then need to call on other people Ð mostly young women Ð to satisfy their desires. 
The sexual Thatcherites will dismiss this problem by insisting that the minnows are perfectly capable of exercising their own freedom by saying ÔnoÕ. They might even suggest that I am being patronising in describing anyone as a ÔminnowÕ in the first place. But I imagine that many readers will be able to recall instances when this attempt at exercising agency in the face of sexual coercion has not worked for them, or for someone else, in the same way that most of us can recall instances when someone we know has been taken advantage of by an employer in some way. The sexual playing field is not even, but it suits the interests of the powerful to pretend that it is. 
When we strip back all sexual morality to the bare bones, leaving only the principle of consent, we leave the way clear for some particularly predatory pikes. As the example of paedophilia advocacy shows, the consent framework is nowhere near robust enough to protect the vulnerable from harm. Given the profound importance and complexity of sexual relationships, a much more sophisticated moral system is required, and the Foucaults and Rubins of the world are not best placed to describe it. 
Reverting to traditionalism doesnÕt solve the problem. Although I reject the chronological snobbery of progressivism that dismisses the dead as stupid and malevolent, the world we live in now is very far removed from the world in which the ancient religious codes were formulated. Our ancestors were confronted with material conditions that are wildly different from our own: they had no reliable contraception, lived in smaller and less complex societies, experienced very high birth and death rates, and by necessity assigned starkly different social and economic roles to men and women. Imitating the past cannot teach us how to live in the twenty-first century. 
Appealing to moral intuition takes us some of the way. Sexual liberalism asks us to train ourselves out of the kind of instinctive revulsion that often has a protective function. I opened this chapter with some extreme examples of sexual behaviour that may be disturbing but are difficult to condemn within the liberal framework. There are plenty of real-life examples that are hardly less extreme. For instance, in 2021, the American actor Armie Hammer made headlines when several of his exes came forward to accuse him of coercive behaviour. One former girlfriend, Courtney Vucekovich, described Hammer as ÔobsessiveÕ and reported that he Ôdid some 
things with me that I wasnÕt comfortable with.Õ31 
Another, Paige Lorenze, spoke about HammerÕs ÔcontrollingÕ behaviour, which gave her a Ôkind of feeling sick to my stomachÕ.32 

The odd thing about this particular #MeToo case is that it really shouldnÕt have come as a surprise to anyone. Hammer had a long history of openly admitting to having violent and degrading sexual tastes Ð not only did he tell Playboy back in 2013 that he liked choking women,33 
he also confessed to his girlfriends that he had a thing for cannibalism. Several of these women have since told journalists that Hammer enjoyed inflicting pain on them during sex and that he also spoke about his desire to break their bones, eat their skin and barbecue their flesh. 
YouÕd think this might have been a red flag. And yet the women who had sexual relationships with Hammer seem to have imbibed the sexually liberal belief that there is a bright line between how a person behaves in the bedroom and how they behave outside of it. So while they didnÕt exactly like HammerÕs interest in cannibalism, they didnÕt feel able to object to it either. They suppressed their moral intuition and, in doing so, were pulled into the orbit of a dangerous and abusive man. As weÕll see in chapter 
6, this is a predictable consequence of the liberal attitude towards BDSM, which is particularly ruinous to naive, agreeable minnows. 
Sexual liberalism is misguided in not only disregarding but actively resisting moral intuition. And yet at the same time, much like the principle of consent, intuition is too simplistic to be serviceable on its own. We may be able to broadly agree on the most outrageous examples (cannibalism, say), but one personÕs gut instinct wonÕt always be the same as another personÕs. Sibling or parental incest Ð supposedly a universal taboo, according to many anthropologists Ð has become a popular category on mainstream porn platforms, which suggests that a not insubstantial minority of users have some interest in it. Moral intuition can be a starting point, but it can also sometimes be a poor guide. 
I canÕt pretend that this is an easy issue to resolve, because ÔHow should we behave sexually?Õ is really just another way of asking ÔHow should we behave?Õ and, after millennia of effort, we are nowhere near reaching an agreement on the answer to that question. Nevertheless, here is my attempt at a contribution: we should treat our sexual partners with dignity. We should not regard other people as merely body parts to be enjoyed. We should aspire to love and mutuality in all of our sexual relationships, regardless of whether they are gay or straight. We should prioritise virtue over desire. We should not assume that any given feeling we discover in our hearts (or our loins) ought to be acted upon. 
Armie Hammer should have repressed his desire to hurt his sexual partners and Jimmy Savile should have repressed his desire to sexually violate children. Doing so would have done them no harm, because some degree of sexual repression is good and necessary. The world would be a better place if such men were more ashamed of their desires and acted on that shame by mastering themselves. But itÕs not only the most appalling abusers who could do with putting virtue before desire. All of us are likely to be tempted by our worst instincts every now and again, and we are much more likely to 
indulge them in a culture that encourages hedonism. Aziz Ansari, like Armie Hammer, is a celebrity who found himself caught up in a Me Too scandal Ð but, unlike Hammer, his misbehaviour was more ambiguous. On the night of 25 September 2017, Ansari went on a date with a woman publicly known only as ÔGraceÕ. They went back to his house and then had some sexual contact that left Grace feeling deeply uncomfortable. Although she gently pulled away, mumbling her reluctance, Ansari tried again and again to initiate sex. Eventually, at his request, she gave him a blow job. He never used any force, and she never actually said ÔnoÕ, but Grace was left feeling used. The next day, she texted Ansari telling him as much and he apologised for having Ômisread thingsÕ. Several months later, she published her account on the website babe.34 

AnsariÕs behaviour did not meet the legal threshold for rape because Grace did technically consent to their encounter. Ansari clearly assumed that Grace would want to have sex with him Ð both because of his celebrity status and because having sex after a first date is now normative among young, Ôsexually liberatedÕ Westerners. And Grace was therefore put in a position in which she had to make the case against their having sex, and she found it almost impossible to do so. Much like the student I quoted in chapter 
1, she instinctively wanted to defend her sexual boundaries, but she was thwarted by a culture in which ÔitÕs just sexÕ is the dominant view. They were two consenting adults who had just been on a date, and sex was the expected way to end the night, so how could she say ÔnoÕ? 
Following the publication of GraceÕs account, liberal feminist commentators tried to condemn Ansari within the consent framework, suggesting that, against the available evidence, their encounter hadnÕt been truly consensual. Given that the need for consent is the only moral principle left standing under the reign of sexual disenchantment, this was the principle that had to be put to work. The problem is that the presence of consent is such a very, very low bar Ð an absolute bare minimum requirement, not an ideal. Ansari had managed to jump this bar, but he had also failed to behave well. In another era, his behaviour might have been described as immoral or ungentlemanly, but these are not words that liberal feminists feel comfortable using, given the icky associations with religious conservatism. The only vocabulary left available to them is that relating to consent, because the ideological toolbox put together by liberal feminism contains just one blunt implement, which Ð unsurprisingly Ð isnÕt up to the job. 
A sophisticated system of sexual ethics needs to demand more of people, and, as the stronger and hornier sex, men must demonstrate even greater restraint than women when faced with temptation. The word ÔchivalryÕ is now deeply unfashionable, but it describes something of what IÕm calling for. As the feminist theorist Mary Harrington writes: ÔChivalrousÕ social codes that encourage male protectiveness toward women are routinely read from an egalitarian perspective as condescending and sexist. But É the cross-culturally well-documented greater male physical strength and propensity for violence makes such codes of chivalry overwhelmingly advantageous to women, and their abolition in the name of feminism deeply unwise.35 

In the coming chapters, IÕll explore some of the self-interested reasons why men might choose, as R. H. Tawney phrased it almost a century ago, Ôthe deliberate acceptance of social restraints upon individual expansionÕ. But the motivation to demonstrate sexual virtue ought to go beyond self-interest. It isnÕt against the law to cheat on a partner, or to accept sexual favours from a person you donÕt respect, or very subtly to coerce someone into sex Ð as Aziz Ansari did with Grace Ð but it isnÕt decent either. There are a lot of sexual behaviours that are neither criminal nor good and about which the consent framework has very little to say. Somewhere in the uneasy space between sexual liberalism and traditionalism, it has to be possible to navigate a virtuous path. 

Notes 
1. 

Jonathan Haidt, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion. London: Allen Lane, 2012, pp. 170Ð6. 

2. 

Richard Guy Parker and Peter Aggleton, eds, Culture, Society and Sexuality: A Reader. London: Psychology Press, 1999, p. 171. 

3. 

R. H. Tawney, Equality. 4th edn, London: Allen & Unwin, [1931] 1952, pp. 181Ð2. 

4. 

David P. Schmitt, ÔSociosexuality from Argentina to Zimbabwe: a 48-nation study of sex, culture, and strategies of human matingÕ, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28 (2005): 247Ð75; discussion, 275Ð311. 

5. 

S. J. Dawson, B. A. Bannerman and M. L. Lalumire, ÔParaphilic interests: an examination of sex differences in a nonclinical sampleÕ, Sexual Abuse 28 (2016): 20Ð45. 

6. 

See 
www.bsa.natcen.ac.uk/latest-report/british-social-attitudes.
30/personal-relationships/homosexuality.aspx. 


7. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_status_of_same.
sex_marriage. 


8. 

Andrew Sullivan, 28 August 1989, https://newrepublic.com/article/79054/here-comes-the-groom. 


9. 

G. K. Chesterton, The Thing: Why I Am a Catholic. London: Sheed & Ward, 1929, ch. 4. 

10. 

Raymond Williams, Marxism and Literature. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977. 

11. 

Ben Thompson, ÔBan this filth!Õ, 9 November 2012, https://web.archive.org/web/20121112141447/http://www.ft.com 


/cms/s/2/093c3726-24e1-11e2-86fb.
00144feabdc0.html#axzz2Bv5X322utv%23axzz2Bv5X3utv. 


12. 

Geoffrey Robertson, 24 May 2008, www.thetimes.co.uk/article/the-mary-whitehouse-story-mary.
quite-contrary-dgqdtrf2qxq. 


13. 

Mary Kenny, ÔIn defence of Mary WhitehouseÕ, 7 June 2010, www.spectator.co.uk/article/in-defence-of-mary-whitehouse. 

14. 

See www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2020/sep/22/from.
mary-whitehouse-to-the-proms-owen-jones-on-how-woke.
became-a-dirty-word-video. 


15. 

Daniel Boffey, ÔRevealed: how Jimmy Savile abused up to 1,000 victims on BBC premisesÕ, 18 January 2014, 




www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/18/jimmy-savile-abused.
1000-victims-bbc. 

16. 
See 
https://order-order.com/2012/10/02/piers-morgan.
laughed-off-saviles-underage-sex-joke/. 

17. 

John F. Burns and Ravi Somaiya, 2 November 2012, www.nytimes.com/2012/11/02/world/europe/shield-of-celebrity.
protected-savile-for-decades.html?auth=login-smartlock. 


18. 

Louis Theroux, ÔLooking back on Jimmy SavileÕ, 1 October 2016, www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-37517619. 

19. 

Scott DÕArcy and Dan Bloom, ÔPaedophile Information Exchange: Leon Brittan Òopposed banning pro-child sex campaign groupÓÕ, 4 

June 
2015, 
www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/paedophile.
information-exchange-leon-brittan-5825108. 


20. 

Tim Stanley, 1 March 2014, https://web.archive.org/web/20140306014809/http://blogs.tele 
graph.co.uk/news/timstanley/100261734/allen-ginsberg-camille.
paglia-and-the-literary-champions-of-paedophilia/. 


21. 

See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Color_Climax_Corporation. 

22. 
See 
www.rt.com/news/child-porn-in-open-access-at-swedish.
national-library/. 

23. 

See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_petition_against_age_of_ 
consent_laws. 

24. 

Matthew Campbell, 28 March 2021, www.thetimes.co.uk/article/french-philosopher-michel-foucault.
abused-boys-in-tunisia-6t5sj7jvw. 


25. 

Louise Griffin, 13 January 2021, https://metro.co.uk/2021/01/13/belle-delphine-responds-as.
shes-accused-of-fetishising-rape-13894142/?ito=cbshare. 


26. 

See https://twitter.com/RepJimBanks/status/1304556525789351937. 


27. 

For reviews, see www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2020/09/11/people.
freaking-out-about-cuties-should-try-it-they-might-find-lot-like/; www.rollingstone.com/movies/movie-reviews/cuties-movie.


review-1056197/; 
www.newyorker.com/culture/the-front.
row/cuties-mignonnes-the-extraordinary-netflix-debut-that.
became-the-target-of-a-right-wing-campaign; 
www.telegraph.co.uk/films/0/cuties-netflix-reviewa-provocative.
powder-keg-age-terrified/. 


28. 
See 
www.pressgazette.co.uk/a-tale-told-too-much-the.
paediatrician-vigilantes/. 

29. 

Patrick Califia, Public Sex: The Culture of Radical Sex. San Francisco: Cleis Press, 2000, p. 26. 

30. 

Matthew Sweet, Inventing the Victorians. London: Faber & Faber, 2002. 

31. 

Francesca Bacardi, 14 January 2021, https://pagesix.com/2021/01/14/armie-hammers-ex-courtney.
vucekovich-he-wanted-to-barbecue-and-eat-me/. 


32. 

Mike Vulpo, 26 January 2021, www.eonline.com/news/1231009/armie-hammers-ex-paige.
lorenze-details-their-polyamorous-bdsm-relationship. 


33. 
Natasha 
Preskey, 
20 
March 
2021, 
www.independent.co.uk/life.
style/armie-hammer-dms-sex-interviews-b1787196.html. 

34. 

Katie Way, ÔI went on a date with Aziz AnsariÕ, https://babe.net/2018/01/13/aziz-ansari-28355. 

35. 

Mary Harrington, ÔFeminism against progressÕ (2021), unpublished manuscript. 






Loveless Sex Is Not Empowering 
In the first ever episode of Sex and the City, aired in 1998, the Manhattanite columnist, socialite and everywoman Carrie Bradshaw resolves to stop looking for ÔMr PerfectÕ and start enjoying herself. In that effort, she hooks up with an ex-boyfriend, Ôa self-centred, withholding creepÕ to whom she no longer has any emotional attachment. She drops round at his place mid-afternoon, enjoys his offer of oral sex, and then leaves before heÕs had a chance to orgasm himself. Ignoring her disgruntled ex, Carrie tells us of her delight: ÔAs I began to get dressed, I realised that IÕd done it. IÕd just had sex like a man. I left feeling powerful, potent and incredibly alive. I felt like I owned this city. Nothing and no one could get in my way.Õ 
In the hit TV show The Fall, aired in the mid-2010s, the gorgeous police superintendent Stella Gibson also relishes the chance to have sex Ôlike a manÕ. Recently arrived in a new city where she has been tasked with investigating a series of murders, she spots a hunky sergeant Ð her junior both in rank and in age Ð and invites him back to her hotel for sex. Discovering later that the man is married, Gibson is ostentatiously unconcerned, justifying her sexual adventurousness with a quote from the feminist Catharine MacKinnon: ÔMan fucks woman; subject verb object.Õ The implication 
is clear: this woman fucks back. These examples tell us something important about how sexual liberation is conceptualised for women, with Sex and the City leading the charge going into the twenty-first century and The Fall now representing a new normal, with Stella Gibson ubiquitously described in the press as a Ôstrong female leadÕ (ÔSheÕs so comfortable with herselfÕ, added actress Gillian Anderson, discussing her character in an interview for The Sun).1 

Both of these protagonists demonstrate their sexual agency by having loveless, brusque sex with men they donÕt like. They show no regard for their partnersÕ intimate lives and discard them immediately afterwards. The purpose of the encounter is both physical gratification and Ð explicitly in BradshawÕs case, implicitly in GibsonÕs Ð psychological gratification. They treat their partners as means, not ends, out of a desire for short-term pleasure. Thus it seems that what the phrase having sex Ôlike a manÕ really means, at least in these popular representations, is having sex like an arsehole. 
Nevertheless, liberal feminism understands having sex Ôlike a manÕ as an obvious route by which women can free themselves from old-fashioned patriarchal expectations of chastity and obedience. If you believe that there is nothing wrong, per se, with instrumentalising other people in pursuit of your own sexual gratification, then this makes sense. And if you believe that men and women are both physically and psychologically much the same, save for a few hang.ups absorbed from a sex-negative culture, then why wouldnÕt you want women to have access to the kind of sexual fun that men have always enjoyed (the high-status ones, at least)? The position is purely reactive: since women have historically been punished for this kind of sexual behaviour, liberation must surely mean not only an end to such punishment but also an endorsement of what was once forbidden: fucking back. 
The sex writer and TV producer Karley Sciortino is a particularly enthusiastic proponent of this view. To her mind, the sexual double standard Ð by which male promiscuity is viewed as neutral or positive while female promiscuity is frowned upon Ð is the product of socialisation within a culture that Sciortino considers to be oppressively anti-sex. The solution, as she sees it, is to train ourselves out of negative responses to what she would call ÔsluttinessÕ: 
Today weÕve created an environment where (allegedly predatory) male sexuality needs to be policed, and (allegedly passive) female sexuality needs to be protected É ItÕs outdated, itÕs offensive, and itÕs psychologically destructive for women, because it has the power to mislead girls into thinking that having one not-ideal sexual experience means that they have lost part of themselves. Hello Ð pitying and victimising women doesnÕt help us: it just dismisses the importance of female sexual agency.2 

The ambiguous term Ônot-idealÕ is doing a lot of work here, because Sciortino does acknowledge that the playing field is not entirely even, with or without the continued existence of slut shaming. For one thing, there is the difference in physical strength that means that any heterosexual encounter will inevitably be more dangerous for the 
woman. For another, there is the risk of pregnancy. But the liberal feminist argument leads us to conclude that, if you are going to destroy the sexual double standard, then you must use your own body, and the bodies of other women, as a battering ram against the patriarchal edifice. The advice to young women is that you must Ôfuck backÕ if you want to be a good feminist, and mostly it will turn out OK Ð and when it doesnÕt? When a sexual encounter turns out to be Ônot-idealÕ, or worse? Well then, we must fall back on liberal feminismÕs old standby: Ôteach men not to rape.Õ 
The problem with this position is that Ôfake it till you make itÕ is not a viable political strategy. We cannot just pretend that the world is safe and that the existence of Ôpredatory male sexualityÕ is no more than an outdated stereotype. As we saw in chapter 
2, 
the 
global 
picture 
of 
sexual violence actually conforms very closely to stereotype Ð it really is men who perpetrate it, and it really is young women who are most at risk. This isnÕt a reality we can just wish away. 
The sociosexuality gap 
Men and women are not the same, either physically or psychologically. Casual heterosexual sex inherently carries much greater risks for women, and in return for much meaner rewards. And yet the (perfectly reasonable) insistence that women should be allowed to Ôfuck backÕ without suffering criminalisation or social ostracisation slips all too easily towards the insistence that they therefore ought to. Carrie Bradshaw and Stella Gibson are, crucially, aspirational characters: attractive, glamorous and professionally successful. Their model is one that we are supposed to follow, and Sciortino encourages her readers to do so. I donÕt doubt that there are some women who genuinely enjoy casual sex and who decide, having weighed the risks and benefits, that it is in their best interests to pursue it. What I question is the claim that a culture of casual sex is somehow of benefit to women as a group. 
IÕve written earlier in this book about what psychologists term ÔsociosexualityÕ Ð the trait that determines a personÕs interest in sexual variety and adventure. The standard questionnaire used by researchers to assess sociosexuality asks respondents the following questions:3 


With 
how many different partners have you had sex within the past 12 months? 


With 
how many different partners have you had sexual intercourse on one and only one occasion? 


With 
how many different partners have you had sexual intercourse without having an interest in a long-term committed relationship with this person? 


Do 
you agree that sex without love is OK? 


Can 
you imagine being comfortable and enjoying ÔcasualÕ sex with different partners? 


Do 
you only want to have sex with a person when you are sure that you will have a long-term, serious relationship? 


How 
often do you have fantasies about having sex with someone you are not in a committed romantic relationship with? 


How 
often do you experience sexual arousal when you are in contact with someone you are not in a committed romantic relationship with? 


In 
everyday life, how often do you have spontaneous fantasies about having sex with someone you have just met? 


Worldwide, there is a significant difference in average sociosexuality between the sexes, with men generally much keener to sow their wild oats than women are. And there is a compelling evolutionary explanation for this difference.4 
As the biologist Anne Campbell writes: 
Biologically speaking, menÕs investment is completed at conception and they are free to move on to pastures new. But women, unlike men, are quality not quantity specialists. Their investment is not limited to a few momentsÕ pleasure Ð they are committed to the reproductive consequences and women produce only a limited number of offspring É So great is the commitment demanded by every child that womenÕs bodies and minds are exquisitely crafted to invest only in the highest-quality child that they can produce.5 

Although itÕs typical for men to invest a great deal of time and energy into offspring produced within a socially recognised relationship (in other words, a marriage), men also have an alternative mode of sexuality in which they favour quantity of offspring over quality Ð that is, inseminating as many women as possible and not hanging around to deal with the consequences. This alternative mode is favoured more by some individual men than others, depending on their degree of sociosexuality Ð ÔcadsÕ versus ÔdadsÕ Ð but the difference is not absolute. Some men may be drawn more towards one sexual strategy than the other at certain points in their lives, or in certain situations, or with certain partners. There is a remarkable flexibility within male sexuality that women are not always aware of, particularly within a political environment that denies the existence of evolved psychological differences between the sexes. 
It is crucial to remember that the sociosexuality difference between the sexes is an average one: there are some women who are exceptionally high in sociosexuality and there are some men who are low in it. This means that, at the individual level, if you know a personÕs sex, you cannot know for certain whether or not they will be highly sociosexual, although you can make an educated guess. 
At the same time, it is also crucial to remember that individual exceptions to the rule do not negate the rule. For instance, the average differences in male and female sexuality become glaringly obvious when we look at the gay and lesbian communities. Although it may be controversial to point out how dramatically these two sexual cultures differ, there is plenty of hard data that it would be dishonest to ignore. Lesbian women are remarkably keen on committed monogamy: the median lesbian woman in the UK reports just one sexual partner within the last year,6 
and a majority report having known their sexual partners for months or years before they first had sex.7 
Lesbian women are also significantly more likely than gay men to get married or enter into a civil partnership.8 
In his memoir about gay life in America in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, Andrew Sullivan writes of the lesbian community that Ôhere is a culture of extraordinary stability and variety, a monogamistÕs dreamÕ Ð although, as he quite rightly notes, this is nevertheless a community Ôwhich somehow has not found its champions among the family-mongering religious right.Õ9 


In contrast, Sullivan describes the Ôlandscape of gay lifeÕ as Ôalmost a painting in testosteroneÕ,10 
and surveys on gay menÕs sexual behaviour confirm this characterisation, with casual sex very much more common in the gay community than in the lesbian community. Although, having said this, the flexibility of male sexuality is even more striking among gay men than it is among the straight. In one representative survey from 2010, roughly a quarter of gay men report being just as stably monogamous as the average lesbian, while another quarter report more than thirteen male partners within the last year,11 
and a smaller (but not insignificant) minority report hundreds of sexual partners across their lifetimes, which is almost unheard of among lesbian women Ð there is, after all, no lesbian equivalent of bathhouse culture. As the authors of the Gay MenÕs Sexual Survey put it: ÔThere is a very wide range of sexual partner change among men who have sex with men Ð many men have only one partner, many men have a different partner each week (or more often).Õ12 

The minority of gay men who are highly sociosexual have a significant effect on the data Ð one large survey from 2016, for instance, found that the mean number of lifetime sexual partners is six times and eight times higher among gay and bisexual men, respectively, compared with straight men.13 
Thus sexual behaviour among gay men is an exceptionally good indicator of what happens when the limiting factor of female sexual preference is entirely removed. 
Straight menÕs sexual preferences are constrained by the fact that, when women are given a choice, they are generally much pickier than men and reject a much larger proportion of suitors. For instance, one study from 1978 Ð since repeated, with exactly the same findings Ð involved participants of average attractiveness approaching strangers of a similar age and propositioning them for sex.14 
As the authors write: ÔThe great majority of men were willing to have a sexual liaison with the women who approach them. Not one woman agreed to a sexual liaison.Õ 
Some feminists would attribute this to a sex-negative culture in which women suffer greater reputational damage when they are seen as being too promiscuous, and it may also be the case that some of the women involved in these studies might have wanted to accept the proposition but refused out of fear for their physical safety. However, these explanations cannot account for the fact that women are also much pickier on dating apps and websites than men are, and that men and women differ dramatically in their baseline levels of sexual disgust.15 
Disgust induces a physiological response that can be measured through heart and respiration rate, blood pressure and salivation, although the individual may not be aware of these indicators,16 
and studies find that, on average, the sexual disgust 
threshold is much lower for women than it is for men. Curiously, I am not aware of any word in the English language for a particular emotion that every woman to whom IÕve spoken has experienced at least once, but that the men to whom IÕve spoken donÕt seem to recognise at all. It is a combination of both sexual disgust and fear Ð the bone-deep, nauseating feeling of being trapped in proximity to a horny man who repulses you. Being groped in a crowd, or leered at while travelling alone, or propositioned a little too forcefully in a bar Ð all of these situations can provoke this horrible emotion. It is an emotion that women in the sex industry are forced to repress. In fact, as the prostitution survivor Rachel Moran has written, the ability not to cry or vomit in response to sexual fear and disgust is one of the essential ÔskillsÕ demanded by the industry.17 

More than any other area of life, prostitution reveals the sometimes vast differences between male and female sexual behaviour. Women make up the overwhelming majority of sex sellers, for the simple reason that almost all sex buyers are male (at least 99 per cent in every part of the world), most men are straight, and the industry is driven by demand. The absence of female sex buyers may partly be a consequence of the physical risks involved in a sexual encounter with a stranger, but this sex skew is also about the nature of male and female desire. 
Sex buyers, by definition, are people who seek out sex outside of a committed relationship, usually with a person they have never met before, and this kind of sexual encounter is far, far more likely to appeal to people high in sociosexuality. People low in this trait are just not interested in having sex with a stranger, and are certainly not willing to pay money to do so or to risk punishment in countries where prostitution is fully or partially illegal. Male and female sociosexuality can be drawn (roughly) as two bell curves with a substantial overlap. But, as with any normally distributed trait, any average group difference will be most glaring at the tails. The people exceptionally high in sociosexuality are overwhelmingly men, and the people exceptionally low in it are overwhelmingly women. This means that, as a rule, any sexual culture that encourages women to Ôfuck backÕ will, more often than not, just encourage women to fuck themselves over. 

A hand held in daylight 
The heterosexual dating market has a problem, and itÕs not one that can be easily resolved. Male sexuality and female sexuality, at the population level, do not match. On average, men want casual sex more often than women do, and women want committed monogamy more often than men do. Hook-up culture demands that women suppress their natural instincts in order to match male sexuality and thus meet the male demand for no-strings sex. Some women are quite happy to do this, but most women find it unpleasant, or even distressing. Thus hook-up culture is a solution to the sexuality mismatch that benefits some men at the expense of most women. 
I propose a different solution, based on a fundamental feminist claim: unwanted sex is worse than sexual frustration. IÕm not willing to accept a sexual culture that puts pressure on people low in sociosexuality (overwhelmingly women) to meet the sexual demands of those high in sociosexuality (overwhelmingly men), particularly when sex carries so many more risks for women, in terms of violence and pregnancy. Hook-up culture is a terrible deal for women and yet has been presented by liberal feminism as a form of liberation. A truly feminist project would demand that, in the straight dating world, it should be men, not women, who adjust their sexual appetites. 
This argument is a long way from the feminist mainstream in the twenty-first century. Progressive media outlets churn out articles with such headlines as ÔYour 7-point intersectional feminist guide to hook upsÕ and Ô5 fantastic ways to engage in feminist hookup cultureÕ, all arguing that, with consent, anything goes.18 
But this approach fails to recognise the relational nature of sex and the competitive nature of the sexual marketplace, overstating the extent to which any of us can make truly free choices in a system in which we are all radically restricted. And it leaves no space for the sociosexuality gap 
Ð after all, how could it? Liberal feminism can hardly bear to recognise the existence of physical differences between the sexes, let alone psychological ones. 
In a darkly funny article published in 2020, Elle magazine wrestles with some of the problems thrown up by hook-up culture,19 
but it does so within an ideological framework that cannot accommodate the fact of sexual conflict. Rather than recognise the difference between men and women on this most crucial of issues, the writers instead attempt to carve out a new, gender-neutral sexual minority of ÔdemisexualsÕ, a Ôselect few members of societyÕ, who just arenÕt 
enthused about casual sex: 
Struggling to identify with her sexuality for years, in 2016 
Washington Post writer Meryl Williams detailed how she came 
across the term ÔdemisexualityÕ on Twitter and started an 
investigation into what it meant, which ultimately helped her 
come to terms with her own sexual orientation. ÔIÕm just glad 
that a term for my sexuality exists, even if itÕs one IÕll probably 
have to explain to my future partners,Õ she wrote. 
What Williams is actually describing here is typical female sexuality. She isnÕt special: sheÕs a normal woman who has just enough emotional insight to recognise that hook-up culture isnÕt good for her but is lacking the political insight to recognise the existence of a bigger problem. 
A more depressing pop-feminist genre comes at the sociosexuality gap from a different angle, advising women to work on overcoming their perfectly normal and healthy preference for intimacy and commitment in sexual relationships. Guides with titles such as ÔHereÕs what to do if you start Òcatching feelingsÓÕ, ÔHow to bio-hack your brain to have sex without getting emotionally attachedÕ and ÔHow to have casual sex without getting emotionally attachedÕ advise readers to, for instance, avoid making eye contact with their partners during sex, in an effort to avoid Ômaking an intimate connectionÕ.20 
Readers are also advised to take cocaine or methamphetamines before sex to dull the dopamine response, but to avoid alcohol, since for women (but, tellingly, not men) this seems to increase Ôthe likelihood they will bond prematurelyÕ. All sorts of innovative methods of dissociation are advised, for example: ÔAnother way to prevent the intimate association between your fuck buddy and the heightened activity in your brainÕs reward center is to consciously focus your thoughts on another person during sex.Õ These guides are all carefully phrased to present the problem as gender-neutral, but research on male and female attitudes towards casual sex, combined with what we know about the sociosexuality gap, makes clear that what is really happening here is that it is overwhelmingly women who are being advised to emotionally cripple themselves in order to gratify men. 
In the West, hook-up culture is normative among adolescents and young adults Ð both popular culture and survey data indicate that sexual behaviour outside of traditional committed romantic relationships has become increasingly typical and socially acceptable.21 
And, although it is possible for young women to opt out, research suggests that only a minority do so.22 
Absent some kind of religious commitment, this is now the ÔnormalÕ route presented to girls as they become sexually active. And young people tend to be very anxious about being ÔnormalÕ. 
Leah Fessler has written thoughtfully about her time as a student at Middlebury College, an institution in which hook-up culture reigned and where abstinence seemed to be the only way in which a female student could avoid participating.23 
Unwilling to commit to celibacy, Fessler convinced herself that emotionless sex was the feminist thing to do, and she did her best to ignore her unhappiness: After I began having sex with these guys, the power balance always tipped. A few hookups in, IÕd begin to obsess, primarily about the ambiguity of it all. My friends and I would analyze incessantly: Does he like me? Do you like him? He hasnÕt texted in a day. Read this text. IÕm so confused. He said he didnÕt want anything, but keeps asking to hang out É With time, inevitably, came attachment. And with attachment came shame, anxiety, and emptiness. 
The worst thing for women at Middlebury were the Ôpseudo.
relationshipsÕ: the mutant children of meaningless sex and loving partnerships. Two students consistently hook up with one another Ð and typically, only each other Ð for weeks, months, even years. Yet per unspoken social code, neither party is permitted emotional involvement, commitment, or vulnerability. To call them exclusive would be Ôclingy,Õ or even Ôcrazy.Õ 
Fessler and her friends quietly admitted to each other that what they really wanted was true intimacy: public recognition of a relationship, an arm around the waist, Ôa hand held in daylightÕ. She wrote her senior year thesis on hook-up culture at Middlebury, and, of the straight women who participated in her research, 100 per cent of interviewees and three-quarters of survey respondents stated a clear preference for committed relationships. Only 8 per cent of women who said they were presently in pseudo-relationships reported being ÔhappyÕ with their situation. Other studies consistently find the same thing: following hook-ups, women are more likely than men to experience regret, low self-esteem and mental distress.24 
And, most 
of the time, they donÕt even orgasm. Female pleasure is rare during casual sex. Men in casual relationships are just not as good at bringing women to orgasm in comparison with men in committed relationships Ð in first time hook-ups, only 10 per cent of women orgasm, compared to 68 per cent of women in long-term relationships.25 
This is partly a consequence of the fact that men who are familiar with their partnerÕs bodies and sexual preferences are better placed to know what they want, but another factor is the so-called sexual script for casual encounters, which is more likely to prioritise male desire. 
We know that, since the turn of the century, rates of anal sex and fellatio have been rising among young adults while rates of cunnilingus have declined, likely a consequence of the influence of internet porn.26 
These sex acts are much less likely to result in female orgasm, with anal sex, in particular, usually offering pain without pleasure for anyone lacking a prostate. One typical study has found that 30 per cent of women experience pain during vaginal sex, that 72 per cent experience pain during anal sex, and that Ôlarge proportionsÕ do not voice this discomfort to their partners.27 
These figures donÕt suggest a generation of women revelling in sexual liberation Ð instead, a lot of women seem to be having unpleasant, crappy sex out of a sense of obligation. 
University campuses offer a particularly good venue for examining hook-up culture, with thousands of young people cooped up together, living and working in the same relatively closed environment. We can, for instance, learn a lot by looking at how the ratio between male and female students affects sexual cultures in these environments, and doing so reveals that the rise in the proportion of women in higher education since the second wave has had a perversely anti-woman effect on the sexual culture. As male students have become a scarcer resource, the balance of power seems to have tipped towards them, and, as one researcher writes: Ôwhile women may run the clubs, dominate in classes, and generally define the character of the university, the law of supply and demand rules the social scene. ThatÕs why the women are both competitive in seeking men and submissive in lowering their standards.Õ28 

Hook-up culture is more common in environments in which men are dominant, and, in a sexual marketplace in which such a culture prevails, a woman who refuses to participate puts herself at a disadvantage. As another group of researchers put it, Ôsome individual women may be capitulating to menÕs preferences for casual sexual encounters because, if they do not, someone else will.Õ29 

And yet this is not, generally, how most women who participate in hook-up culture understand their behaviour Ð at least not at the time. Looked at coolly, we may be able to recognise the existence of a sexual marketplace with its own internal rules and incentive structure, and we can readily identify different interest groups within it. But thatÕs usually not how real people actually feel about their sexual lives, which are not only intimate and messy but also bound up with complicated issues of self-esteem. 
The liberal feminist narrative of sexual empowerment is popular for a reason: it is much more palatable to understand oneself as a sassy Carrie Bradshaw, making all the decisions and challenging the patriarchal status quo. Adopting such a self-image can be protective, making it easier to endure what is often, in fact, a rather miserable experience. If youÕre a young woman launched into a sexual culture that is fundamentally not geared towards protecting your safety or wellbeing, in which you are considered valuable in only a very narrow, physical sense, and if your only options seem to be either hooking up or strict celibacy, then a comforting myth of ÔagencyÕ can be attractive. 
This myth depends on naivetŽ about the true nature of male sexuality. TodayÕs young women are typically unaware that men are, in general, much better suited to emotionless sex and find it much easier to regard their sexual partners as disposable. Ignorant of this fact, women can all too easily fail to recognise that being desired is not at all the same thing as being held in high esteem. It isnÕt nice to think of oneself as disposable or to acknowledge that other people view you that way. Often, itÕs easier to turn away from any acknowledgement of what is really going on, at least temporarily. IÕve spoken to a lot of women who participated in hook-up culture when they were young and only years later came to realise just how unhappy it made them. IÕve yet to meet anyone who has travelled the same emotional journey, but in the opposite direction. 
If youÕre a woman whoÕs had casual sexual relationships with men in the past, you might try answering the following questions as honestly as you can: 
1. 
Did you consider your virginity to be an embarrassing burden you wanted to be rid of? 

2. 
Do you ever feel disgusted when you think about consensual sexual experiences youÕve had in the past? 

3. 
Have you ever become emotionally attached to a casual sexual partner and concealed this attachment from him? 

4. 
Have you ever done something sexually that you found painful or unpleasant and concealed this discomfort from your partner, either during sex or afterwards? 


If your score is zero, then congratulations Ð your high socio-sexuality and good luck have allowed you successfully to navigate a treacherous sexual marketplace. But if you answered ÔyesÕ to any of these questions (as I suspect you probably did), you are entitled to feel angry at a sexual culture that set you up to fail. 

Cads and dads 
While most women assess both their short-term and their long-term partners based on the same criteria, most men do not.30 
A woman will typically look for identical qualities in a hook-up as she does in a husband: as the evolutionary biologist David Buss puts it, Ôin both cases, women want someone who is kind, romantic, understanding, exciting, stable, healthy, humorous, and generous with his resources. In both contexts, women desire men who are tall, athletic, and attractive.Õ31 
Men, in contrast, tend to be very particular about the criteria they look for in a potential spouse but much less so when 
seeking out casual sex. Sherry Argov, author of the best-selling dating advice book Why Men Love Bitches, puts it frankly: ÔWhat men donÕt want women to know is that, almost immediately, they put women into one of two categories: Ògood time onlyÓ or Òworthwhile.Ó And the minute he slides you into that Ògood time onlyÓ category, youÕll almost never come back out.Õ32 
There is a straightforward scientific reason for the existence of these two categories: it is hard to dissuade men out of their instinct to care about what evolutionary biologists call Ôpaternity certaintyÕ. Men in ÔcadÕ mode arenÕt concerned with the welfare of their unknown offspring, since they are favouring quantity over quality, but men in ÔdadÕ mode care a great deal and will often devote their lives to providing for their families. 
But ÔdadÕ mode carries a significant cost in the form of jealousy. In our evolutionary history, men who unwittingly devoted themselves to raising children not genetically related to them were at a selection disadvantage, while those who practised what biologists call Ômate guardingÕ Ð i.e. behaving jealously Ð could be certain that their children were their own. The sexual double standard is the result of this mate-guarding instinct. 
As with all other features of our evolutionary heritage, there is room for flexibility here. Plenty of men (and women) are utterly devoted to their adoptive or step-children, regardless of their genetic link. And a surprisingly high proportion of men privately express a sexual interest in cuckolding which may seem confusing within a strict 
evolutionary framework. However, in general the sexual double standard is so prevalent and so fiercely held that it is considered by some anthropologists to be a human universal.33 

It was once much stronger in the West. Lawrence Stone writes in his history of divorce in England that until quite recently the double standard was formalised in law, with female adultery considered to be Ôan unpardonable breach of the law of property and the idea of hereditary descentÕ, whereas male adultery was Ôregarded as a regrettable but understandable foibleÕ.34 
And the British sociologist Anthony Giddens (born in 1938) describes the sexual culture that prevailed in the mid-twentieth century: 
Virginity on the part of girls prior to marriage was prized by both sexes. Few girls disclosed the fact if they allowed a boyfriend to have full sexual intercourse Ð and many were only likely to permit such an act to happen once formally engaged to the boy in question. More sexually active girls were disparaged by the others, as well as by the very males who sought to Ôtake advantageÕ of them. Just as the social reputation of the girls rested upon their ability to resist, or contain, sexual advances, that of the boys rested upon the sexual conquests they could achieve.35 

Although it may not be formalised in law or even explicitly spoken about in the post-sexual revolution era, the sexual double standard does persist. For adolescents, the association between lifetime number of sexual partners and peer status varies significantly by sex, such that greater numbers of sexual partners are positively 

correlated with boysÕ social status but negatively correlated with that of girls.36 
Among adults, promiscuity in men is generally viewed neutrally, whereas a womanÕs reputation among her peers is damaged as her number of sexual partners increases.37 
People may be reluctant actually to say so outright, but privately there is a social penalty suffered by women viewed as promiscuous. 
When looking for a long-term partner, anonymous surveys suggest that the vast majority of straight men prefer to choose a wife with a limited sexual history and little interest in casual sex, past or present. Women also prefer a husband who is not unusually promiscuous, but their preference is not as strong, and most are willing to accept a man who has historically enjoyed casual sex but has since settled down.38 

Importantly, however, men generally donÕt mind a more extensive sexual history when theyÕre looking for a hook-up, or what Sherry Argov would call a Ôgood time onlyÕ partner. Then, in fact, promiscuity may increase the appeal. With a high sexual disgust threshold, a natural interest in sexual variety, no personal risk of pregnancy, and no fear of slut shaming, casual sex offers men a cornucopia of delights that are difficult to resist. And the liberal feminist narrative of Ôfucking backÕ provides comfort for any man whose conscience might trouble him. With hook-up culture established as normative, both men and women are funnelled into patterns of behaviour that are grimly complementary. Men are encouraged into ÔcadÕ mode, pursuing temporary relationships that offer all of the pleasures of cheap sex and none of the responsibilities of commitment. Meanwhile, women compete with each other for short-term male sexual attention, and may well win it, but in a form liable to induce (in Leah FesslerÕs words) Ôshame, anxiety, and emptinessÕ. 

Mutual incomprehension 
Just like their female peers, men may not consciously realise that this is what theyÕre participating in. And, in one sense, who can blame them? Teenage boys are raised on pop culture that presents having sex Ôlike a manÕ as the ultimate form of female sexual empowerment, and, in the porn to which they are typically exposed from childhood, women are shown begging men for painful or degrading sex acts. When young men start having sex offline, they will likely encounter women Ð themselves schooled by porn and pop culture Ð who hide their distress, fake their orgasms, work hard to avoid Ôcatching feelingsÕ, and in all other ways strive to be what Gillian Flynn has famously described as the ÔCool GirlÕ, the woman who is Ôabove all hotÕ: ÔHot and understanding. Cool Girls never get angry; they only smile in a chagrined, loving manner and let their men do whatever they want. Go ahead, shit on me, I donÕt mind, IÕm the Cool Girl.Õ39 

We should hardly be surprised when, after all this, many men assume that women really donÕt mind being relegated to Ôgood time onlyÕ. The resulting dysfunction can be glimpsed in posts such as this, on the r/relationships subreddit: I was hanging out with my friends with benefits on Thursday after work. We been hooking up for six months. I was heating us up some food and she started asking about what I look in a long term girlfriend. 

I told her that I want someone successful, and someone that I think would make a good mom. She starts then talking about how she has those qualities and I see how this conversation is going so I change the topic. 
She brings it up and starts asking me what should she focus on to be the kind of girl guys want to marry one day. I told her she is fine the way she is, she just needs to find the right guy. She asked me why I donÕt want to date her down the road when I am looking for something. 
I told her, that she is great, but she isnÕt really girlfriend material in my eyes. She started crying like crazy after that. I donÕt know what was going on we never had a thing, she never talked about having feelings or anything.40 

Or this post, on a different subreddit: I have been seeing my friends with benefits Kara for a while now, almost 8 months. We used to work together, now before you guys ask no she does not have a crush on me or emotionally likes me. 
She has been single for a while and wants a guy similar to me if 
that makes sense, has a decent career etc, in decent shape. Now honestly I think she is punching too high when it comes to a relationshipÉ. I told her that she should focus less on physical traits like looks and be willing to look past them when dating guys. She asked me if I was telling her to lower her standards and I was like sort of. She got super offended.41 

These men seem to be genuinely bewildered by the fact that the women they have been having sex with for many months are unhappy in these pseudo-relationships. And the women seem to have drifted into this arrangement, not realising how little regard their partners really have for them. This is a tragedy of mutual incomprehension. 
However, I cannot help but harbour a sneaking suspicion that many men Ð perhaps all Ð do realise that operating in ÔcadÕ mode is not actually harmless. Male readers who have ever had heterosexual casual sex might like to ask themselves these questions, a counterpart to the questions I addressed to female readers earlier in the chapter: 
1. 
Have you ever had sex with a woman youÕd be embarrassed to introduce to your friends? 

2. 
Have you ever failed to contact a woman after sex? 

3. 
Have you ever suspected that your casual partner was becoming emotionally attached to you and failed either to commit to or break off the relationship? 

4. 
Have you ever encouraged a woman to do something sexually, even though she showed reluctance? 


The answer to all of these questions ought to be ÔnoÕ, but a culture of casual sex incentivises men to do such things, and generally with no social penalty. If anything, men who fuck and chuck Ôgood time onlyÕ women can often expect to increase their social status among their male peers, at least in the short term. 
In a casual sex culture, the centre of gravity shifts towards the higher end of the sociosexuality spectrum, and this disproportionately benefits men. But that isnÕt to say that there isnÕt an eventual cost to be borne by the men who throw themselves into such a culture. A manÕs period of youthful desirability isnÕt as narrow as a womanÕs (which is really only twenty years, from late teens to late thirties), but the playboy period is still time limited Ð perhaps a third of a modern Western lifetime. A man in his twenties with a different partner every week might have a certain glamour, but no man in his sixties or seventies can sustain that kind of lifestyle Ð even if he were still able to attract casual partners (a big ÔifÕ), his peers would regard him as a dirty old man, with no glamour whatsoever. Casual sex harms men too, though not as immediately, and not as obviously. 
But casual sex harms women most of all. I realise that avoiding it will often be difficult, given the pressures of the twenty-first-century dating market, but, unless you are in the small minority of women who are exceptionally high in sociosexuality (in which case you will have scored ÔzeroÕ on my earlier list of questions), the risks of casual sex are going to outweigh the benefits. 
Being alone with an unknown, horny man will always be somewhat dangerous for any woman, given the differences in size and strength. And although itÕs of course true that husbands and long-term boyfriends also commit domestic violence, thatÕs no reason to do away with the vetting process altogether. ItÕs better to date men that are already part of oneÕs social network because, if theyÕve developed a reputation for treating their girlfriends badly, you are likely to hear about this through mutual friends. When you date a stranger from the internet, the only person who can give you information about his sexual history is the man himself, and his account is unreliable. WhatÕs more, there is nothing stopping him from treating his date badly and then melting back into the night, having suffered no social consequences whatsoever. Mutual friends and acquaintances can punish bad behaviour. Dating apps canÕt. 
The fact that a man wants to have sex with a woman is not an indication that he wants a relationship with her. Holding off on having sex for at least the first few months is therefore a good vetting strategy for several reasons. Firstly, it filters out the men who are just looking for a hook-up. Secondly, it gives a woman time to get to know a man before putting herself in a position of vulnerability. Thirdly, avoiding the emotional attachment that comes with a sexual relationship makes it easier to spot red flags. Free from the befuddling effects of hormones, itÕs possible to assess a new boyfriendÕs behaviour with clearer eyes. 
One of the factors that acts against women in heterosexual dating is the gender gap in the personality trait that psychologists call ÔagreeablenessÕ, colloquially more likely to be referred to as ÔnicenessÕ. It has long been known by researchers that, on average, women are much more agreeable than men. This sex difference could be a result of nature, or nurture, or a combination of both Ð it doesnÕt especially matter, at least not for my purposes here. The point is that there is a gap Ð and a substantial one Ð between men and women in this most crucial of traits.42 

Agreeable people are more likely to put their own interests last and, against the evidence, more likely to think the best of people. IÕm a very agreeable person, which means, for instance, that I tend to avoid interpersonal conflict and IÕm terrible at negotiating pay. If you want to know how agreeable you are, you can search online for Ôbig five personality testÕ Ð itÕs a useful thing to know about yourself, because it can help to guide your behaviour. I now know that being excessively agreeable is my path of least resistance, so I make a conscious effort to be more assertive. 
Agreeable people are particularly vulnerable to being taken advantage of by disagreeable people and, given that women are on average significantly more agreeable than men are, this has obvious relevance to sexual politics. So my advice to agreeable women assessing potential partners is not to ask yourself ÔWould this man make a good boyfriend for me?Õ, because doing so risks allowing your niceness to override your good sense. Ask yourself instead ÔWould this man make a good father to my children?Õ Ð not because you necessarily intend to have children with this man, or indeed with anyone, but because agreeable people find it easier to prioritise the interests of people they love than to prioritise their own interests. And if he wouldnÕt make a good father, donÕt have sex with him. It means that he isnÕt worthy of your trust. 
Liberal feminism has valorised having sex Ôlike a manÕ as a route to womenÕs liberation. But we will never be able to have sex like men, because we will never be men. There is an inherent asymmetry to heterosexuality that canÕt be overcome, despite the existence of modern contraception and other forms of technology that offer a brittle illusion of sameness. We can either accept that fact, and act accordingly, or we can keep sending young women out as cannon fodder in the battle against sexist double standards and then, when they return wounded, decry sexism all the louder. IÕd also like to live in a world in which women can do whatever they want, without fear of what men might do to them. But we donÕt live in that world. Our present reality demands that both men and women accept the existence of the sexual asymmetry, even if that means curtailing our freedoms. And, unwelcome as that reality may be, we are obliged to describe it truthfully. 
Notes 
1. 

Elaine McCahill, ÔThereÕs a tensionÕ, 29 September 2016, www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1880453/the-falls-gillian.
anderson-discusses-sexual-chemistry-between-her-character.
and-jamie-dornans-serial-killer/. 


2. 

Karley Sciortino, Slutever: Dispatches from a Sexually Autonomous Woman in a Post-Shame World. New York: Grand Central, 2018, pp. 10Ð11. 

3. 

ÔThe revised sociosexual orientation inventory (SOI-R) short manualÕ, www.larspenke.eu/pdfs/SOI-R%20Manual.pdf. 

4. 

David P. Schmitt, ÔSociosexuality from Argentina to Zimbabwe: a 48-nation study of sex, culture, and strategies of human matingÕ, Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28 (2005): 247Ð75; discussion, 275Ð311. 

5. 

Anne Campbell, A Mind of Her Own: The Evolutionary Psychology of Women. 2nd edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press, [2002] 2013, p. 51. 

6. 

J. V. Bailey, C. Farquhar, C. Owen et al., ÔSexual behaviour of lesbians and bisexual womenÕ, Sexually Transmitted Infections 79 (2003): 147Ð50. 

7. 

L. Henderson, D. Reid, F. Hickson et al., First, Service Relationships, Sex and Health amongst Lesbian and Bisexual Women. London: Sigma Research, 2001; https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/id/eprint/1402. 




8. 
See 
www.economist.com/britain/2020/01/09/why-lesbian.
couples-are-more-likely-to-divorce-than-gay-ones. 

9. 

Andrew Sullivan, Love Undetectable: Notes on Friendship, Sex, and Survival. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1998, pp. 162Ð3. 

10. 

Ibid., p. 160. 

11. 

Partnership Patterns and HIV Prevention amongst Men who have Sex with Men (MSM), 


www.nat.org.uk/sites/default/files/publications/July-2010.
Partnership-Patterns-and-HIV-Prevention.pdf. 

12. 
Ford Hickson et al., Testing Targets: Findings from the United Kingdom Gay MenÕs Sex Survey 2007, 
https://researchonline.lshtm.ac.uk/id/eprint/1386840/1/report2 
009f.pdf. 

13. 

Catherine H. Mercer et al., ÔThe health and well-being of men who have sex with men (MSM) in Britain: evidence from the third National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3)Õ, BMC Public Health 16 (2016), article 525; doi:10.1186/s128 89.016-3149-z. 

14. 

R. D. Clark and E. Hatfield, ÔGender differences in receptivity to sexual offersÕ, Journal of Psychology & Human Sexuality 2 (1989): 39Ð55. 

15. 

L. Al-Shawaf, D. M. Lewis and D. M. Buss, ÔSex differences in disgust: why are women more easily disgusted than men?Õ, Emotion Review 10 (2018): 149Ð60. 

16. 

Diane M. Kedzierski, An Examination of Disgust, its Measures, and Gender Differences in the Experience of Disgust Sensitivity. PhD dissertation, Nova Southeastern University, Florida, 2013; https://nsuworks.nova.edu/cps_stuetd/43. 

17. 

Rachel Moran, Paid For: My Journey through Prostitution. Dublin: Gill & Macmillan, 2013. 



18. 
See 
https://everydayfeminism.com/2016/07/feminist-hook-up.
culture/; 
www.mic.com/articles/57795/your-7-point.
intersectional-feminist-guide-to-hook-ups. 

19. 
Katie OÕMalley and Becky Burgum, ÔDemisexuality meaning and how it affects physical intimacy and attractionÕ, 27 July 2021, www.elle.com/uk/life-and-culture/culture/a32765/what-it.
means-to-be-demisexual/. 
20. 

See www.womenshealthmag.com/relationships/a30224236/casual.
sex-feelings/; 
www.vice.com/en/article/59mmzq/how-to-bio.
hack-your-brain-to-have-sex-without-getting-emotionally.
attached?utm_source=vicefbus; 
https://elle.in/article/how-to.
have-casual-sex-without-getting-emotionally-attached-according.
to-science/. 


21. 

Justin R. Garcia et al., ÔSexual hookup culture: a reviewÕ, Review of General Psychology 16 (2012): 161Ð76. 

22. 

Lisa Wade, ÔThe rise of hookup culture on American college campusesÕ, 
25 
August 
2017, 
https://scholars.org/brief/rise.


hookup-sexual-culture-american-college-campuses. 


23. 

Leah Fessler, ÔA lot of women donÕt enjoy hookup culture Ð so why do we force ourselves to participate?Õ, 17 May 2016, https://qz.com/685852/hookup-culture/. 

24. 

R. L. Fielder and M. P. Carey, ÔPrevalence and characteristics of sexual hookups among first-semester female college studentsÕ, Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy 36 (2010): 346Ð59. 

25. 

E. A. Armstrong, P. England and A. C. K. Fogarty, ÔAccounting for womenÕs orgasm and sexual enjoyment in college hookups and relationshipsÕ, American Sociological Review 77 (2012): 435Ð62. 

26. 

Caroline Heldman and Lisa Wade, ÔHook-up culture: setting a new research agendaÕ, Sexuality Research and Social Policy 7 (2010): 323Ð33. 

27. 

D. Herbenick, V. Schick, S. A. Sanders et al., ÔPain experienced during vaginal and anal intercourse with other-sex partners: findings from a nationally representative probability study in the United StatesÕ, Journal of Sexual Medicine 12 (2015): 1040Ð51. 

28. 

R. Whitmire, ÔA tough time to be a girl: gender imbalance on campusesÕ, Chronicle of Higher Education 54 (2008): A23. 

29. 

Heldman and Wade, ÔHook-up cultureÕ. 

30. 

David Buss and David Schmitt, ÔSexual strategies theory: an evolutionary perspective on human matingÕ, Psychological Review 100 (1993): 204Ð32. 

31. 

David Buss, The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. New York: Basic Books, [1994] 2016, p. 137. 

32. 

Sherry Argov, Why Men Love Bitches. New York: Adams Media, p. 55. 

33. 

Donald E. Brown, Human Universals. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991. 

34. 

Lawrence Stone, The Road to Divorce: England 1530Ð1987. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995, p. 7. 

35. 

Anthony Giddens, The Transformation of Intimacy: Sexuality, Love and Eroticism in Modern Societies. Cambridge: Polity, 1992, p. 9. 

36. 

Derek A. Kreager and Jeremy Staff, ÔThe sexual double standard and adolescent peer acceptanceÕ, Social Psychology Quarterly 72 (2009): 143Ð64. 

37. 

Michael J. Marks, Tara M. Young and Yuliana Zaikman, ÔThe sexual double standard in the real worldÕ, Social Psychology 50 (2019): 67Ð79. 

38. 

Daniel N. Jones, ÔThe Òchasing AmyÓ bias in past sexual experiences: men can change, women cannotÕ, Sexuality & Culture 20 (2016): 24Ð37. 

39. 

Gillian Flynn, Gone Girl. New York: Crown, 2012. 

40. 

See www.reddit.com/r/relationships/comments/72115r/i25m_told_ 


my_friends_with_benefits24f_i_dont_see/. 


41. 

See www.reddit.com/r/AmItheAsshole/comments/db03qr/aita_for_t 
elling_my_fwb_that_i_think_she_should/. 


42. 

Yanna J. Weisberg, Colin G. DeYoung and Jacob B. Hirsh, ÔGender differences in personality across the ten aspects of the Big FiveÕ, Frontiers in Psychology 2 (2011): 178; doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00178. 







Consent Is Not Enough 
In 2015, Andrew Norfolk, chief investigative reporter for The Times, gave a lecture on the four years he and his colleagues had spent reporting on child sexual abuse committed by gangs in British cities, including Rotherham, Rochdale, Telford and Oxford. He described the experiences of a victim whose case had stuck in his mind: 
One of the victims was a girl from Essex, but sheÕd been put into a childrenÕs home in Rotherham, and she was the only resident of that childrenÕs home É In two months in that home sheÕd gone missing fifteen times, for periods ranging from a day to a fortnight, and on one of those missing nights sheÕd been taken to a house, put blind drunk into a bedroom, and cars had started arriving from all across Greater Manchester. Men were queueing on the stairs and on the landing outside the bedroom and the jury heard that fifty men had had sex with that girl in one night. She was a child.1 

At exactly the same time, on the other side of the Atlantic, Kacey JordanÕs porn career was already under way. Aged eighteen, Jordan had starred in porn films, including All Teens 3, Barely 18 38, Barely Legal 80, Just Legal Babes 2 and DonÕt Let Daddy Know 4. Despite being legally an adult, Jordan looked unusually young Ð petite with slim hips and small breasts Ð meaning that she was still able to star convincingly in ÔteenÕ porn into her early twenties. In her most famous scene, fifty-eight amateurs (that is, ordinary men) took turns to ejaculate over her naked, childlike body. 
At the age of twenty-two, Jordan livestreamed a suicide attempt over YouTube. She is now attempting to rebuild her life. In a 2018 interview, she spoke about her many plastic surgeries: ÔI wanted to reinvent myself É one of the reasons for the boob job was that the fetishists were into the idea of me being underage, because itÕs rare for a grown adult like me to have the body of a 14 year old. That was why I sold so much porn.Õ2 
Years on, Jordan is able to speak candidly about how naivetŽ and grinding poverty led her into the sex industry. As a younger woman, though, she took a very different view, insisting point blank that she was a consenting adult who was free to do as she wished. Having reached her eighteenth birthday, she was legally entitled to give this response. The victim of the Rotherham gang, still a child, was not. 
For practical reasons, the age of consent has to serve as a legal bright line, separating statutory rape from consensual sex. There is no other way that the law could function. Although young people undoubtedly mature at different rates, and the transition from childhood to adulthood is, like night turning to day, a gradual process, we have to establish an arbitrary marker. At 11pm, she is a child; at midnight, she becomes an adult. ThatÕs how it has to be. 
But we all know that in the real world that doesnÕt quite work. If we recoil from NorfolkÕs account of fifty men queuing up to sexually violate a teenage girl who had been abandoned by the state services tasked with protecting her, how can we then watch video of a young woman only a few years older, looking just as much like a child, being violated by even more men, without a similar response? The sore, torn orifices are the same. The exhaustion and disorientation are the same. The men aroused by using and discarding a young woman presented to them as a ÔteenÕ are also much the same. 
This chapter is about the predatory nature of the porn industry and its destructive effects on the people involved in it. ItÕs also about the idea of sexual consent, because the only defence that the porn industry has, when presented with its hideous list of crimes, is its own version of the sexual liberation narrative: everyone is consenting, everyone is an adult, the women like it, and who are you to say otherwise? 
Now, we might respond by pointing out that actually not everyone is an adult, and not everyone is consenting, in the narrow legal sense of the word, given the very many images of children and non-consenting adults that can be found even on the most mainstream porn platforms. But the industry and its defenders are quick to dismiss such examples as outliers, swivelling back to the Ôhappy hookersÕ who prop up its reputation. And as long as those women are old enough, (moderately) sane enough, and donÕt say ÔnoÕ at the crucial moment, then they reach the legal consent threshold and the industry can do with them what it likes. 
But consent has more layers to it than that. There is the barest definition of the term on which we have to rely in a court of law Ð did she and could she say ÔnoÕ? Ð but there is also a thicker meaning. And here IÕm afraid weÕre going to have to let go of seductively simple ideas about consent derived from liberal individualism. IÕm going to argue that, although Ôbut she consentedÕ may do as a legal defence, it is not a convincing moral defence. 
The ÔQueen of PornÕ 
People Ð particularly young women Ð will sometimes claim the ability to consent to some of the worst harms you can imagine. The victims of child grooming gangs are no exception. Although some do desperately seek out help, only to be turned away, it is far more common for girls to reject anyone who tries to intervene to stop the abuse. Sometimes they do this because theyÕve been intimidated into silence, but more often itÕs a consequence of something far more troubling: they think that the adult men abusing them are their loving boyfriends. 
This is what grooming does. ItÕs the same state described by more old-fashioned terms such as ÔbrainwashingÕ and ÔStockholm syndromeÕ Ð a total loss of psychological independence. Think of the wife brutally beaten by her husband who then throws herself across his body when the police try to arrest him, something that domestic violence victims do all the time. Think of the dead-eyed followers of Charles Manson, killing on command and then walking beaming into the courtroom, marching in unison with the letter ÔXÕ carved into their foreheads to mark them out as ÔMansonÕs girlsÕ. Branding, incidentally, is a detail that often recurs in accounts of this kind of all-consuming abuse. One of the victims of the Oxford grooming gang was branded with an ÔMÕ, the initial of her pimp. Similarly, in 1994, a man called Alan Wilson used a hot knife to burn an ÔAÕ and a ÔWÕ into his wifeÕs buttocks, an act for which he was tried and later acquitted, thus producing R v. Wilson, a famous piece of English case law. Wilson claimed his wife was turned on by being branded like a cow. The wife refused to testify. The court believed the husband. 
Some researchers believe that the grooming response is adaptive: a perfectly rational response to the threat of violence. The anthropologist Michelle Scalise Sugiyama, for instance, suggests that the capture of women during warfare was such a common event in human evolutionary history that it had important effects on our psychology.3 
The women who were able to integrate into their new communities were best placed to survive, meaning that those who were able to emotionally attach to their captors had a selection advantage over those who resisted. 
Of course, men can be groomed too. The original event for which Stockholm syndrome is named Ð the taking of hostages at a Swedish bank Ð involved the capture of several men, who also formed an intense attachment to their captor. But it is a phenomenon we observe far more often in women Ð perhaps, as Scalise Sugiyama argues, because of our evolutionary history. Perhaps instead (or additionally) because women are more likely than men to find themselves in the sort of situation that most efficiently induces the response: intimate proximity to a violent man. 
Looked at from one angle, grooming is just a particularly intense and blind form of love, an emotional attachment that is fundamentally irrational but no less important and meaningful for that. Many women who have been in an abusive relationship will describe the feeling of being hopelessly trapped in the emotional forcefield of their abuser Ð terrified, wretchedly unhappy, but also desperate to stay. 
For some women, there is no distinction between the experience of domestic abuse and the experience of performing in porn. Linda Lovelace (real name Linda Boreman), star of the 1972 hardcore film Deep Throat, is perhaps the most famous example of a woman who entered porn literally, as she later detailed in her autobiography Ordeal, at gunpoint. Her first husband, Chuck Traynor, physically and emotionally abused her and coerced her into prostitution and, later, porn. Although it was widely known in the porn industry that Traynor was beating Boreman behind closed doors, no one seemed to mind (ÔShe seemed to have a sado-masochistic relationship with ChuckÕ, shrugged the director of Deep Throat in a later interview). 
When Deep Throat became an international success, grossing over $600 million,4 
Boreman toured the UK, attending Ascot in a miniskirt, and during a visit to Stonehenge announced: 
To be honest with you, it makes me so mad that sex films are 
called obscene when other movies are so full of slaughter and 
rated so that kids can see them. What kids should learn is that 
sex is good, and then there wouldnÕt be so many neurotics in the 
world. I mean youÕre only here once, so enjoy life!5 

ÔLinda LovelaceÕ appeared to be a grateful beneficiary of sexual liberation. Only later did she reveal the truth of what was done to her and become a campaigner against the porn industry. She wrote in 
Ordeal of her experiences of performing in porn: 
They treated me like an inflatable plastic doll, picking me up and 
moving me here and there. They spread my legs this way and 
that, shoving their things at me and into me, they were playing 
musical chairs with parts of my body. I have never been so 
frightened and disgraced and humiliated in my life. I felt like 
garbage. I engaged in sex acts in pornography against my will to 
avoid being killed.6 

This is a consistent pattern: women who have worked in porn will conform to the liberation narrative while theyÕre still a part of the industry and share the dark side of their experiences only once theyÕve left. And by then their images are out in the world, and thereÕs no way of getting them back. Boreman wrote in 1980 that Ôeveryone that watches Deep Throat is watching me being raped.Õ Half a century on, people are still watching it. 
And younger women are still experiencing the (now hugely expanded) porn industry in much the same way that Boreman did. Vanessa Belmond, for instance, spent seven years performing in porn, between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five. She is explicit about the cruelty of the industry: the racism she experienced as a black woman,7 
the financial exploitation, the prevalence of STDs, and the total lack of respect for the boundaries and wellbeing of porn performers, many of whom came away from scenes with injuries and became dependent on drugs and alcohol to numb the physical and emotional pain. Belmond is also open about her own youthful experiences of an eating disorder8 
alongside addictions to drugs9 
and porn use,10 
all of which contributed to her entering the industry in the hopes of becoming as glamorous, beautiful and desired as she imagined porn performers to be. She describes the exploitative nature of an industry that chews up and spits out young women when they arrive as teenagers, dreaming of money and fame: 

Here is the pattern I have seen over and over again in my 7 years in this industry: Girl gets into porn, shoots regularly for about 6 months to a year doing relatively tame sex scenes. Work starts to slow down, so girl decides to do more hardcore scenes (things like anal, multiple men etc.). Work slows down again. Girl now starts escorting and becomes ÔopenÕ to doing just about anything on camera to get work. Eventually, there is no company willing to shoot her and porn work is dried up. Girl usually has no work history and often no schooling, and now is essentially stuck with escorting, stripping, webcamming and any porn work she might be able to scrape up.11 

But, much like Linda Boreman, when Belmond was still involved in the industry, she was the first to insist that she was simply expressing her sexual agency: One by one, all of my boundaries were crossed. Did I ever tell my fans that? Of course not! As far as they knew, I started doing anal because I Ôwanted to try something new.Õ If you had asked these fans, I did the most hardcore sex scenes because I Ôgot into porn to act out all of my fantasies on camera!Õ 
I was just a ÔsexualÕ young girl trying out all of the things she fantasized about! Right? I certainly wasnÕt a broken-down young woman doing what she had to do to make money in the sex industry. I wasnÕt a young woman whose self-worth had been completely destroyed to the point where she felt like nothing more than an object, a commodity. Noooo. I was a Ôliberated,Õ Ôsexually open,Õ Ôparty girl!Õ12 

This transition into and out of the ÔliberatedÕ role also holds true for those few women who do make it in porn. Jenna Jameson, for instance, is still one of the most famous porn actresses in the world and, for a time, one of its most visible supporters, christened the ÔQueen of PornÕ in the media. In 2001, the Oxford Union invited Jameson to come to Oxford to argue against the proposition ÔThe house believes that porn is harmfulÕ. Her side won the debate, 204 to 
27.13 
But Jameson is now a vehement critic of the sex industry. In her autobiography How to Make Love Like a Porn Star: A Cautionary Tale she writes of shooting scenes with performers she found repulsive, the near constant physical pain and exhaustion resulting from a gruelling schedule, and all this in an industry filled with abusive men who take any opportunity to degrade the women they work with. Jameson left the sex industry in 2008 and has since become an outspoken conservative and anti-porn campaigner.14 


The crimes of MindGeek 
JamesonÕs campaigning fury is directed in particular at Pornhub, the tenth most visited website in the world, and she has lent her support to the American campaign group TraffickingHub, who have been developing a growing body of evidence that Pornhub knowingly hosts videos of children and sex trafficking victims being raped, as well as so-called revenge porn shared without the victimÕs consent. 
The Internet Watch Foundation has so far confirmed 118 cases of children being sexually abused on Pornhub.15 
One fifteen-year-old girl who had been missing for a year was found after her mother was tipped off that her daughter was being featured in videos on Pornhub 
Ð fifty-eight such videos of her rape and abuse were discovered. Another girl, fourteen-year-old Rose Kalemba, was gang raped at knifepoint. Footage of the attack was posted on Pornhub and viewed more than 400,000 times. Kalemba contacted the site repeatedly over a period of six months, asking for the video to be removed, but with no success. Meanwhile, Pornhub continued to profit from the footage of her assault. You donÕt need to go to the Ôdark webÕ in order to access this material Ð itÕs available on the biggest, most mainstream porn site in the world. 
Globally, the porn industry is certainly worth many billions of US dollars, with some placing the figure as high as $97 billion. MindGeek, the giant of the porn world, operates nearly a hundred websites, including Pornhub, that in total consume more bandwidth than Twitter, Amazon or Facebook.16 
MindGeekÕs organisational structure is complex, with an elaborate system of companies scattered all over the world, including in tax havens such as Cyprus and Luxembourg. In 2009, then owner Fabian Thylmann was arrested on charges of tax evasion and consequently sold MindGeek to Feras Antoon and David Marmorstein Tassillo. For the last decade, these two men have managed to keep an astonishingly low profile Ð Antoon has only a brief Wikipedia mention, and Marmorstein Tassillo has none at all. Unlike figures such as Jack Dorsey, Jeff Bezos and Mark Zuckerberg, the senior executives of MindGeek are not household names, and they have thus far been able to keep out of the media spotlight, accumulating vast wealth without the burden of public accountability. 
In December 2020, an article in the New York Times delivered a painful blow to MindGeek. Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Nicholas Kristof conducted an investigation into the failure of Pornhub to remove sexual images of children and non-consenting adults from its platform. The New York Times is not only one of the most prestigious news outlets in the world, it is also a liberal publication that rarely publishes articles critical of the sex industry. Thus KristofÕs piece could not easily be dismissed by PornhubÕs defenders as yet another example of conservative prudishness, and his damning verdict was all the more persuasive: Ô[The Pornhub] site is infested with rape videos. It monetizes child rapes, revenge pornography, spy cam videos of women showering, racist and misogynist content, and footage of women being asphyxiated in plastic bags. A search for Ògirls under18Ó (no space) or Ò14yoÓ leads in each case to more than 100,000 videos.Õ17 

The response was immediate. Mastercard and Visa both announced that they would be ending the use of their cards on Pornhub and, four days after the publication of KristofÕs piece, MindGeek announced that it would create a new team of moderators to review and remove Ôpotentially illegal materialÕ, ban downloads, and change its upload policies so that only verified users would be permitted to post videos.18 
Pornhub later purged all existing videos from unverified users, reducing the number of videos on its platform from 13 million to 4 million.19 
This was by far the most significant crackdown in the siteÕs history. 
It was also not enough. An ongoing legal case gives a taste of the sort of shady practices MindGeek has been involved with, and could yet continue to be involved with, despite the introduction of its new safeguarding measures. GirlsDoPorn was a porn production company, founded in 2009, whose channel was at one point one of the twenty most popular on Pornhub. These were not amateur videos posted by unverified users Ð GirlsDoPorn was a slick, professional company that relied on an elaborate scam. It placed fake modelling adverts on Craigslist asking for young women aged eighteen to twenty-two to contact them. Those who responded were put in touch with other women paid to pretend they had had positive experiences working for the company as models. Some of the women were told part of the truth: that they would be obliged to have sex on camera. But none were told the whole truth: that the videos would be distributed online. 
GirlsDoPorn producers lied to these women, telling them that the videos would be sold on DVD to private buyers on the other side of the world. They also lied about the filming process, telling them that they would be expected to have sex for only 30 minutes. Instead, filming lasted up to seven hours. The women were coerced into producing porn that was then distributed without their knowledge. Half of them were not even given the total sum of money promised by the producers. 
Monica Evans was one of the women who responded to a fake modelling ad posted by GirlsDoPorn producers in 2013, just two months after her eighteenth birthday. She was flown out to California, where she was coerced into filming hours of rough intercourse. As she later told Vice: ÔI was in so much pain. I didnÕt want to do it anymore and they said, ÒNo, you signed a contract, itÕs only ten more minutesÓ É I was there for four or five hours. It was torture. Then they took me to the airport. I cried the whole plane ride home.Õ20 
A month later, the video was everywhere. It was linked to MonicaÕs social media accounts, her family were sent screenshots, and her little sister was harassed. Monica emailed Pornhub asking them to take down her video, but she never heard back. She was admitted to a psychiatric hospital. 
Monica was one of the young women who later gave evidence in a civil case brought by twenty-two victims of GirlsDoPorn. In January 2020, the plaintiffs were awarded $12.775 million in damages and, during the course of the case, criminal charges were also brought, including sex trafficking and producing sexual images of a child. Some of the people associated with GirlsDoPorn have been charged by American federal authorities. Two of those defendants Ð porn actor Ruben Andre Garcia and cameraman Theodore Wilfred Gyi Ð have pleaded guilty and await sentencing, while GirlsDoPorn co-
creator Michael James Pratt remains at large.21 
Although this civil lawsuit was filed in June 2016, Pornhub did not remove the GirlsDoPorn channel until October 2019,22 
when criminal charges were brought. In December 2020, forty women involved with GirlsDoPorn filed a further lawsuit claiming that MindGeek knew about the companyÕs sex trafficking as early as 2009, and definitely by 2016, but nevertheless continued to partner with GirlsDoPorn.23 
The lawsuit also alleges that, as recently as December 2020, MindGeek failed to remove GirlsDoPorn videos despite requests for removal by victims. At the time of writing, the lawsuit remains outstanding.24 

Despite this kind of barely concealed malpractice, MindGeek continues to churn out profits for one simple reason: people keep watching. Some of the abuses of the porn industry are deliberately hidden from consumers, with porn performers paid to moan with pleasure as they clench with agony. But sometimes the abuse is obvious. Sometimes, in fact, the abuse is the point. 
The format of the GirlsDoPorn videos dwelt on the coercion rather than concealing it. Typically filmed in hotel rooms and with minimal crew, the women were given money on camera and asked to read parts of their (misleading) contracts out loud. There was no pretence that these women were enthusiastic participants Ð their reluctance was intended to be sexy. And, based on the success of GirlsDoPorn over its eleven-year existence, porn consumers found the genre very sexy indeed: these videos were viewed over a billion times on sites 
owned by MindGeek. The porn industry would not produce content depicting abuse unless there were a demand for it. There is a darkness within human sexuality Ð mostly, but not exclusively, within men Ð that might once have been kept within a fantasistÕs skull, but which porn now makes visible for all the world to see. The industry takes this cruel, quiet seed and makes it grow. 

Limbic capitalism 
In a 2020 survey of men across a range of Western European countries, respondents reported watching an average of 70 minutes of online porn a week, with 2 per cent watching more than 7 hours.25 
The average man, it seems, spends more time watching porn than he does showering.26 

And yet not all men watch porn, even in younger cohorts: a 2019 survey commissioned by the BBC found that 23 per cent of UK men aged eighteen to twenty-five reported having not watched porn in the last month.27 
Porn use is not evenly distributed through the population but, rather, conforms to the Pareto distribution, with a minority of people accounting for the vast majority of consumption. It is these consumers who are chiefly responsible for allowing the porn industry to flourish, and yet they are also exploited by the industry in their own way. 
A lot of porn consumers feel conflicted about their use. Dr Fiona Vera Grey, a research fellow at Durham University, has conducted research with both men and women about their experiences of using porn. A common emotional response among users sheÕs heard from is a feeling of overwhelming arousal, followed abruptly by feelings of shame immediately after orgasm. Many users, Vera Grey reports, Ôhave an ethical conflict going on in terms of seeing material that they feel is pretty shit for women, but personally theyÕre aroused by itÉ. So theyÕre masturbating to material and then afterwards they think Òoh my GodÓ, and they push the computer away.Õ28 

Sexual arousal suppresses our disgust response29 
for a straightforward biological reason: other people are potential sources of disease, but we have to get close to other people in order to reproduce. The natural disinclination towards intimacy with strangers is therefore disabled when we find those strangers sexually attractive. And the disgust response is very closely linked with moral intuition.30 
Put simply, weÕre not as good at making fine-tuned moral judgements when weÕre horny. 
And porn sites are set up to arouse users as quickly as possible. Not only do thumbnails show the most explicit moments of a video Ð always the act of penetration, never the performers just sitting on a bed Ð the links to videos are also often animated and play automatically when the user hovers a cursor over them, or else when the site opens. As soon as a user arrives, their eyes (and sometimes ears) are immediately bombarded with intense sexual stimuli. This basic drive, as fundamental as hunger or thirst, canÕt be resisted through moral reasoning. It is an involuntary response that the porn 
industry has become very adept at provoking. This kind of website design is a particularly disturbing example of what Professor David Courtwright has called Ôlimbic capitalismÕ, that is, a Ôtechnologically advanced but socially regressive business system in which global industries, often with the help of complicit governments and criminal organizations, encourage excessive consumption and addiction. They do so by targeting the limbic system, the part of the brain responsible for feeling.Õ31 
Limbic capitalism is the reason why the most successful apps are brightly coloured like fresh fruit and glint like fresh water. Our primitive brains helplessly seek out the stimuli that we have evolved to be attracted to because responding to those stimuli gave our ancestors a survival advantage. Purveyors of limbic capitalism have become wise to these instincts and have learned over time how best to capture them. 
Porn is to sex as McDonaldÕs is to food. These two capitalist enterprises take our natural appetites, pluck out the most compulsive and addictive elements, strip away anything truly nutritious, and then encourage us to consume more and more. Both products are examples of superstimuli: exaggerated versions of naturally occurring stimuli that tap into an evolved longing for nourishment, excitement and pleasure but do so in a maladaptive way, fooling the consumer into gorging on a product that initially feels good but in the long term does them harm. 
When faced with such temptations, we human beings are not all that much more sophisticated than the Australian jewel beetle (Julodimorpha bakewelli), a glossy, golden-coloured beetle around 4 cm long. In 1981, a pair of insect specialists observed a male jewel beetle attempting to mate with a discarded beer bottle (known in Australian slang as a ÔstubbieÕ). Upon further investigation, they found that male jewel beetles were not only frequently mistaking stubbies for females of their species, they actually preferred the stubbies, ignoring potential mates in order to hump the glass bottles because these bits of litter were more glossy and more golden than the female jewel beetles, and thus more sexually exciting to the males.32 

Porn provides much the same attraction, offering bigger breasts and bigger dicks than those encountered Ôin the wildÕ, and thus also offering more excitement. The impending arrival of realistic sex robots on the market is likely to intensify this superstimuli effect still further. The evolutionary biologist Diana Fleischman writes of the malign impact of these new pieces of technology on their purchasers: 
The cues a sex robot would provide to the evolved psychology of a previously disgruntled teenager would be ÔyouÕre achieving incredible mating success and status by staying at home and playing video games, keep at it!Õ É Video games and social media already undermine the native psychological mechanisms that make us work towards status Ð they supply more immediate rewards and take far less effort than anything we work towards out in the real world. Sex robots are only going to make that worse, especially for young men.33 

Why bother getting a job, going to the gym, or maintaining your personal hygiene if your sex robot doesnÕt care either way? If a sterile piece of plastic can keep a young man sexually sated, he doesnÕt need to go out and meet real women. Of course, he will never acquire a spouse or children and will be left in the end with only his sex robot for companionship. But he will arrive at that lonely state having been emotionally cushioned by the reliable dopamine hit won from playing the sexual equivalent of a slot machine game over and over again. 
Even without access to sex robots, some men are already prioritising watching porn over pursuing relationships with real partners. As weÕll see in chapter 
7, one perverse feature of the twenty-first-century dating market is that the average young person is now having sex less often than their parents and grandparents once did, and there is an increasingly large and frustrated population of men who remain virgins into their twenties and beyond. This subset of men is particularly vulnerable to the purveyors of limbic capitalism. 
The 2 per cent of Western European men who report watching more than 7 hours of porn a week are not a healthy and happy group, and nor are the men whose porn use may be less time-consuming but is nevertheless personally destructive. The continuing influence of the NoFap movement is a testament to the sexual dissatisfaction that often comes with porn use. Founded in 2011 by the American web developer Alexander Rhodes, NoFap encourages followers to give up both porn and masturbation (ÔfapÕ being slang derived from the sound of a man pleasuring himself). Followers Ð overwhelmingly male Ð are offered freedom from the addictive power of porn and the consequent sexual impairment that has skyrocketed within the last twenty years, with erectile dysfunction now affecting between 14 and 35 per cent of young men, in contrast to perhaps 2 or 3 per cent at the beginning of this century.34 

Members of the NoFap subreddit sometimes write of masturbating so often that they give themselves painful abrasions, and many report suffering from Ôdeath grip syndromeÕ, a quasi-medical term used to describe the loss of sensation that can sometimes result from masturbating too aggressively. Sufferers report finding it difficult or impossible to reach orgasm during sex with another person, partly because of physical desensitisation and partly because of the psychological effect of porn use. Even if they are motivated to seek out sex with a real person, psychological death grip may mean that they cannot become aroused by someone whose body isnÕt exactly like that of a porn star. Compulsive porn users expose themselves to so much sexual stimulation that they literally become impotent. 
The American actor and athlete Terry Crews is now an advocate of the NoFap movement, having publicly spoken about his own struggle with porn addiction: ÔSome people say, ÒHey, man É you canÕt really be addicted to pornography.Ó But IÕm gonna tell you something É It changes the way you think about people. People become objects. People become body parts; they become things to be used rather than people to be loved.Õ35 
Crews is handsome, rich and successful. He is also a husband and father of five. Nevertheless, he found himself neglecting his wife and watching porn instead, like an Australian jewel beetle choosing an inert object over a real, living mate. Such is the power that porn has over some users. 
The feminists who criticised porn in the 1970s and 1980s got a lot right, correctly predicting the industryÕs direction of travel. The infamous June 1978 cover of Hustler magazine, depicting a womanÕs body being pulped in a meat grinder, now looks almost tame compared to the images of grotesque sexual violence that are available, not only on mainstream porn sites but also on social media platforms marketed as suitable for children. 
But something that this generation of feminists didnÕt predict was the paradoxical effect that pornification would have on sexual behaviour at the population level. On the one hand, we have a sexual script that has become increasingly aggressive and loveless. But, on the other, we have a group of men who are so stupefied by porn that they are (sometimes permanently) impaired in their ability to have sexual relationships with real people. Put simply, the porn generation are having less sex, and the sex they are having is also worse: less intimate, less satisfying and less meaningful. 

Logging off 
We are rapidly entering a world in which tech dominates the most intimate parts of our lives, and this tech is designed by corporations whose sole interest is profit making. The writer Venkatesh Rao describes this as a world in which Ôyou either tell robots what to do, or are told by robots what to doÕ Ð you live either above the algorithm, or below it.36 
The porn industry is a particularly unpleasant example of this creeping domination, since all but a tiny number of us are to be found below the algorithm. 
There are a few people in the porn industry who are unambiguously villainous Ð the executives of MindGeek, who are found determinedly above the algorithm, do not provoke any sympathy in me Ð but there are many more people below the algorithm whose moral status is harder to define. In particular, porn users, who are both the drivers of the industry and also its victims: not as victimised as the performers, of course, but victimised nonetheless. They are caught up in a form of limbic capitalism that takes our most basic instincts and corrupts them in the pursuit of profit. You cannot criticise capitalism without also criticising its most debased offspring, the porn industry, which destroys its workers and its consumers alike. 
And yet most anti-capitalists prefer to look away. In fact, the most committed defences of porn come nowadays from self-described Ôsex-positiveÕ leftists who claim that any criticism of the industry must necessarily be a criticism of its workers (funnily enough, they do not make the same defence of industries that rely on sweatshop labour). These apologists are aided, in part, by the efforts of the industry to sanitise its practices. Pornhub, for instance, runs a smoke and mirrors exercise it calls ÔPornhub CaresÕ, with campaigns against plastic pollution and the destruction of bee and giant panda habitats (ÔPornhub is calling on our community to help get pandas in the mood. WeÕre making panda style porn!Õ) 
But a far more effective counter to any criticism of the industry is the sexual liberation narrative, always available to comfort any porn user who feels a squirm of discomfort at what theyÕre funding. Kacey Jordan, Jenna Jameson, Vanessa Belmond and Linda Lovelace all gave some version of this narrative at the height of their fame, responding to anyone who asked with a dismissive Ôof course IÕm consenting.Õ All of these women later changed their minds, after the porn industry had had its fill of them, and after the damage to their bodies and psyches had already been done. 
Taking a woman at her word when she says Ôof course IÕm consentingÕ is appealing because itÕs easy. It doesnÕt require us to look too closely at the reality of the porn industry or to think too deeply about the extent to which we are all Ð whether as a consequence of youth, or trauma, or credulousness, or some murky combination of all three Ð capable of hurting or even destroying ourselves. You can do terrible and lasting harm to a Ôconsenting adultÕ who is begging you for more. 
Some feminists place their faith in so-called ethical porn, but this hypothetical product serves only to distract from the reality of how the porn industry really operates. For one thing, porn marketed as ÔethicalÕ makes up such a tiny and unpopular proportion of the market that focusing on it is like, as feminist writer Sarah Ditum has put it, Ôputting a chicken in your back garden and claiming youÕve fixed factory farming.Õ37 
For another, whatever ÔethicalÕ label may be stuck on a video, you cannot look at it and know for sure that the people in it were truly happy to be there. Just as importantly, you cannot look at a video and know if the people in it are still happy that their images are out in the world. Linda Lovelace was an enthusiastic defender of the porn industry during her promotion of Deep Throat: it was only years later that she said that viewers were Ôwatching me being rapedÕ. 

And even aside from the conditions of its production, the product itself will always have a damaging effect on the consumerÕs sexuality. The feminist critic Laura Mulvey has used the phrase Ôthe invisible guestÕ to describe the role of the viewer who looks on at the events of a film, forgotten in the corner of the room.38 
The role of the porn viewer should be understood as that of an invisible voyeur. Porn trains the mind to regard sex as a spectator sport, to be enjoyed alone and in front of a screen. It removes love and mutuality from sex, turning human beings Ð as Terry Crews has put it Ð Ôinto body partsÕ. 
This is one of those rare problems that has such a blindingly simple solution: opt out. Regardless of whether the state regulates the porn industry Ð as I believe it ought to Ð the individual maintains absolute control over whether or not he or she directly contributes to it. There is no good reason to use porn. Giving it up costs the consumer nothing. It is easier by far than giving up factory-farmed meat or products made by sweatshop labour because, although we all need to eat and clothe ourselves, not a single one of us needs to watch porn ever again. The sexual liberation narrative tells you to keep going; IÕm telling you that you have an obligation to stop. 

Notes 
1. 

ÔAn 
uncomfortable 
truthÕ, 
www.youtube.com/watch? 
v=qrUiHB5qJJ0. 


2. 

Generation Wealth, director Lauren Greenfield, Evergreen Pictures, 2018. 

3. 

Michelle Scalise Sugiyama, ÔFitness costs of warfare for womenÕ, Human Nature 25 (2014): 476Ð95. 

4. 

ÔLinda Boreman, 53, star of ÒDeep ThroatÓ became advocate against 
pornÕ, 
23 
April 
2002, 
www.latimes.com/archives/la-xpm.
2002-apr-23-me-linda23-story.html. 


5. 

Simon Garfield, ÔBlow for freedomÕ, 28 April 2002, www.theguardian.com/film/2002/apr/28/features.review. 

6. 

Linda Lovelace and Mike McGrady, Ordeal: An Autobiography. New York: Citadel Press, 1980. 

7. 

See 
www.antipornography.org/racism-in-porn-industry-harsh.
reality-exposed.html. 


8. 

See 
www.antipornography.org/my-bulimia-eating-disorder-story.
how-it-harmed-me.html. 


9. 

See 
www.antipornography.org/my-story-of-becoming-a.
methamphetamine-addict.html. 


10. 
See 
www.antipornography.org/female-porn-addiction-my-story.
how-i-became-addict.html. 

11. 

See 
www.antipornography.org/working-in-porn-is-a-dead-end.
trip-to-nowhere.html. 


12. 

See 
www.antipornography.org/is-doing-porn-empowering-for.
women.html. 





13. 
See 
www.stylist.co.uk/people/10-unlikely-oxford-union.
speakers/13301. 

14. 
Ashley Maaike, ÔJenna Jameson is speaking out against trafficking in pornÕ, 5 August 2020, https://filmdaily.co/news/jenna-jameson-porn-trafficking/. 

15. 
See 
https://filia.org.uk/resources/2020/5/16/international-call.
for-credit-card-freeze-on-porn-sites. 

16. 

David Auerbach, ÔVampire pornÕ, 23 October 2014, https://web.archive.org/web/20141219160919/http://www.slate. 
com/articles/technology/technology/2014/10/mindgeek_porn_ 
monopoly_its_dominance_is_a_cautionary_tale_for_other_ind 
ustries.html. 


17. 

Nicholas Kristof, ÔThe children of PornhubÕ, 4 December 2020, www.nytimes.com/2020/12/04/opinion/sunday/pornhub-rape.
trafficking.html. 


18. 

Nicholas Kristof, ÔAn uplifting update on the terrible world of PornhubÕ, 9 December 2020, 

www.nytimes.com/2020/12/09/opinion/pornhub-news-child.
abuse.html. 


19. 

Kari Paul, 14 December 2020, www.theguardian.com/technology/2020/dec/14/pornhub-purge.
removes-unverified-videos-investigation-child-abuse. 


20. 

Meg OÕConnor, 18 October 2019, www.vice.com/en_uk/article/evjkdw/she-helped-expose-girls.
do-porn-but-she-can-never-outrun-what-it-did-to-her. 


21. 

Debbie L. Sklar, 12 April 2021, https://timesofsandiego.com/crime/2021/04/02/10-more.
women-join-lawsuit-against-pornhub-plaintiffs-now-total-50/. 


22. 

Ana Valens, ÔPornhub pulls Girls Do Porn videos amid sex trafficking chargesÕ, 15 October 2019, www.dailydot.com/irl/pornhub-girls-do-porn-federal-charges/. 



23. 
See 
www.10news.com/news/local-news/women-sue-pornhubs.
parent-company-for-hosting-girlsdoporn-com-videos. 

24. 
Sklar, 12 April 2021. 
25. 

T. Jacobs, K. Fog-Poulsen, A. Vermandel et al., ÔThe effect of porn watching on erectile functionÕ, European Urology Open Science 19, Supplement e1121Ðe1122, July 2020. 

26. 
See 
www.mirashowers.co.uk/blog/trends/revealed-what-brits.
are-really-getting-up-to-in-the-bathroom-1/. 

27. 

Moya Lothian-McLean, ÔHow do your porn habits compare with young people across BritainÕ, 14 March 2019, 

www.bbc.co.uk/bbcthree/article/bb79a2ce-0de4-4965-98f0.
9ebbcfcc2a60. 


28. 

Interview with Fiona Vera Grey, 2 June 2020. 

29. 

Charmaine Borg and Peter J. de Jong, ÔFeelings of disgust and disgust-induced avoidance weaken following induced sexual arousal in womenÕ, PLoS ONE 7 (2012): e44111. 

30. 

C.-E. Ivan, ÔOn disgust and moral judgments: a reviewÕ, Journal of European Psychology Students 6 (2015): 25Ð36. 

31. 

David Courtwright, 31 May 2019, https://quillette.com/2019/05/31/how-limbic-capitalism-preys.
on-our-addicted-brains/. 

32. 

Darryl T. Gwynne and David C. F. Rentz, ÔBeetles on the bottle: male buprestids mistake stubbies for females (Coleoptera)Õ, Australian Journal of Entomology 22 (1983): 79Ð80. 

33. 

Diana Fleischman, 24 April 2018, https://jacobitemag.com/2018/04/24/uncanny-vulvas/. 

34. 

Amy Fleming, ÔIs porn making young men impotent?Õ, 11 March 2019, 
www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/mar/11/young.
men-porn-induced-erectile-dysfunction. 


35. 

Brandon Griggs, ÔTerry Crews: porn addiction Òmessed up my lifeÓÕ, 24 February 2016, 

https://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/24/entertainment/terry-crews.
porn-addiction-feat/index.html. 


36. 

Venkatesh Rao, 17 August 2017, www.ribbonfarm.com/2017/08/17/the-premium-mediocre-life.
of-maya-millennial/. 



37. 
Sarah 
Ditum, 
26 
June 
2020, 
https://unherd.com/2020/06/why.
doesnt-porn-ever-get-cancelled/. 

38. 
Laura Mulvey, ÔVisual pleasure and narrative cinemaÕ, Screen 16/3 (1975): 6Ð18. 




Violence Is Not Love 
One of the pleasurable things about BDSM, from a business perspective, is that it so often demands kit. The British high-street retailer Ann Summers currently offers a six-piece Ôbondage setÕ for £60, a starter pack which includes a flogger, blindfold, ball gag, ankle cuffs, handcuffs and rope. To this could be added dozens of other items from the Ann Summers BDSM range, from multi-chain nipple clamps (£15) to basic hog ties (£10). 
Many of these products feature Fifty Shades of Grey branding, the novel and film franchise having provided a golden opportunity for Ann Summers to diversify its range. In 2017, the flagship store at LondonÕs Marble Arch invited customers to visit a basement room Ð ÔThe Red RoomÕ Ð devoted to all things Fifty Shades. There could be found a bondage dog crate, butt plugs with fluffy tails, a penis cage, and a £10,000 vibrator that came complete with matching cufflinks.1 
Who knew that sexual liberation could be so profitable? 
This marketing wheeze was entirely in keeping with the spirit of the Fifty Shades franchise, which eroticises wealth just as much as it eroticises sexual dominance. Christian Grey, the troubled romantic hero, is charming, handsome, and knows his way around a fluffy butt plug. He is also a billionaire, and the victim of his affections, Anastasia, is wooed just as much by his Airbus EC130 helicopter as she is by the sex dungeon that he calls his ÔRed RoomÕ. Of course, take away all of these distractions, and what Christian Grey really undertakes is just common-or-garden domestic abuse. He becomes obsessed with a much younger, virginal woman. He wins her over by bombarding her with attention. He controls her every move, from what she wears to who she spends time with. He even dictates what sheÕs allowed to eat. 
And hereÕs the troubling thing: a lot of women loved it. Not all women Ð personally, IÕm unmoved by Christian GreyÕs charms, as are most of the friends IÕve spoken to Ð but, for a sizeable minority, the combination of domestic abuse and ostentatious wealth proved highly arousing and therefore highly lucrative Ð for the author E. L. James herself, for publishers, for filmmakers and for retailers of BDSM gear, including Ann Summers. 
Radical feminists have historically explained this disturbing form of arousal as the product solely of socialisation, imbibed from a culture that celebrates female submission and male domination. Although there is some truth to this idea, the radical feminist analysis doesnÕt fully explain the popularity of BDSM among the women who bought Fifty Shades. The sad truth is that a minority of women do find BDSM very sexy, and you do not have to go far to find such women publicly defending the practice as an expression of their sexual agency. To my mind, a more plausible (and more distressing) explanation for this behaviour has to include a recognition that some women may be primed to find Christian GreyÕs abusive behaviour arousing Ð and that priming is a consequence not only of culture but also of biology. 
The idea of possessiveness 
In chapter 
2, we confronted the fact that there are important average differences between men and women when it comes to sexuality. One striking feature of typical female sexuality is a preoccupation with partnersÕ displays of emotional loyalty. This is a logical consequence of the fact that a pregnant and nursing woman is astonishingly vulnerable, and she and her baby are more likely to survive if she has a committed and well-resourced mate. A man may demonstrate his suitability for the role in various ways, for instance by buying gifts, lavishing his mate with attention, and showing kindness towards children. 
He can also show his commitment in more unpleasant ways. Christian Grey is a violent, controlling brute, but his obsessive behaviour towards Anastasia does at least demonstrate his unwavering commitment to her. Fifty Shades adds a whips-and.chains aesthetic, but many older romance novels are centred on much the same dynamic: the strong handsome man who falls head over heels in love with the heroine and will do anything to have her, up to and including being violent. 
Next time youÕre in your local library, have a look at the covers and blurbs of some Mills & Boon novels, written for an older and more traditionalist audience than Fifty Shades. Invariably the heroes are portrayed as big and muscly and are either high-status professionals (surgeons, say) or adventurous vagabonds (pirates or highwaymen). There is variation within the romance genre, and heroes may be more or less aggressive depending on the particular book, but one theme remains consistent: the consumers of womenÕs erotic fiction have never been turned on by a man who plays hard to get, wavers in his interest, or is distracted by the attentions of other women. Long before Fifty Shades came along, what these readers were aroused by is the fantasy of a man who is really into them, often obsessively so. 
Sometimes that desire for undivided attention favours the gentle giant who is loving and tender towards women, children and kittens. But a womanÕs perfectly rational desire for a loyal mate can also sometimes be hijacked by the likes of Christian Grey, who is undoubtedly committed to Anastasia but is also controlling and dangerous. 
The tragedy is that, while the fictional Christian Grey may be faithful to Anastasia, his real life counterpart often isnÕt. ItÕs easy enough for an inexperienced or overly trusting woman to confuse jealousy for fidelity and so be drawn to the aggressive heroes of erotic fiction. But, in reality, the two character traits do not necessarily go hand in hand. 
The conservative writer and psychiatrist Theodore Dalrymple has never been one for repeating feminist pieties, which in this instance makes his analysis of the jealousy dynamic more candid. When working at a hospital in a deprived area of Birmingham, England, Dalrymple often encountered both the victims and the perpetrators of domestic abuse, and he writes about his patientsÕ experiences with no effort to mince his words: The great majority of the jealous men I meet are flagrantly unfaithful to the object of their supposed affections, and some keep other women in the same jealous subjection elsewhere in the city and even 100 miles away. They have no compunction about cuckolding other men and actually delight in doing so as a means of boosting their own fragile egos. As a result, they imagine that all other men are their rivals: for rivalry is a reciprocal relationship. Thus a mere glance in a pub directed at a manÕs girlfriend is sufficient to start a fight not only between the girl and her lover but, even before that, between the two men.2 

As for the women who become involved with such men, Dalrymple writes of a self-harming instinct which is not often acknowledged among feminists but is likely to be familiar to anyone who has ever worked with victims of domestic abuse: 
But why does the woman not leave the man as soon as he manifests his violence? It is because, perversely, violence is the only token she has of his commitment to her. Just as he wants the exclusive sexual possession of her, she wants a permanent relationship with him. She imagines Ð falsely Ð that a punch in the face or a hand round the throat is at least a sign of his continued interest in her, the only sign other than sexual intercourse she is ever likely to receive in that regard. In the absence of a marriage ceremony, a black eye is his promissory note to love, honour, cherish, and protect.3 

In this chapter, IÕm going to argue that BDSM is simply a ritualised and newly legitimised version of a toxic dynamic that is all too common between men and women. Although the sexual domination of ÔsubsÕ by ÔdomsÕ may have been given a counter-cultural gloss in recent decades, it is in fact as old as the hills. As we will see, BDSM enthusiasts have worked hard to present their sexual interest as a means of subverting the status quo, but in fact it is nothing of the sort. The mainstreaming of BDSM has, firstly, served to protect the interests of men who want to beat up women and avoid being punished for it, and, secondly, it has made a lot of money for the porn industry and for manufacturers of tacky leatherette clothing. In other words, BDSM is good for abusive men and good for capital. It subverts nothing. 
The popular representation of BDSM often focuses on a very particular and unusual relationship in which a wealthy businessman pays a female dominatrix for regular whippings. These relationships do exist, and their amusingly counter-intuitive dynamics make them attractive to screenwriters and journalists. But they are not typical. 
Most submissives (ÔsubsÕ) are female and most dominants (ÔdomsÕ) are male. One 2013 study4 
of participants in a BDSM online forum found that only 34 per cent of men consistently preferred the sub position, while an even smaller proportion of women Ð 8 per cent Ð identified as doms. The same study found that doms tended to be low in the agreeableness personality trait, meaning that they were assertive and demanding. Subs, in contrast, tended to be more agreeable than average, meaning that they were eager to please. These findings call into question the idea that people are drawn to BDSM roles that go against their normal dispositions Ð in fact, the opposite seems to be true. Most of the time, doms remain doms outside of the bedroom (or sex dungeon), and subs remain subs. In the real world, BDSM does not defy the sexual domination of women by men Ð rather, it reinforces it. 

The Sutcliffean woman 
But this is not, I regret to say, the dominant feminist view in the twenty-first century. It was not even the unanimous view in the 1970s, when radical feminism was riding high. In the influential text The Sadeian Woman, for instance, published in 1978, Angela Carter attempted a literary deconstruction of the writings of the grandfather of BDSM: the Marquis de Sade, the French aristocrat for whom ÔsadismÕ is named. Immersed in the psychoanalytic style that was fashionable at the time, Carter identified in SadeÕs work a kind of protofeminism, referring to Ôthe pornographerÕ Ð of which Sade is the pre-eminent example Ð as an Ôunconscious allyÕ to women, Ôbecause he begins to approach some kind of emblematic truth.Õ5 
The Sadeian Woman is part of a long, sorry history of feminists prioritising their own intellectual masturbation over their obligation to defend the interests of women and girls. 
Carter is not alone in venerating Sade, and in the years since the publication of The Sadeian Woman she has been joined by many other sex-positive feminists keen to reclaim BDSM for women. There are also plenty of men who have historically enjoyed SadeÕs work. Flaubert and Baudelaire, for instance, rediscovered his writings in the nineteenth century and, in the 1920s, Surrealists including Man Ray, AndrŽ Breton, and Dali were attracted to SadeÕs demand for 

absolute sexual freedom.6 
These renegades fell well outside of the mainstream in their own time and, in fact, struggled to get hold of copies of SadeÕs books, since they were banned in France until 1957.7 
But in the 1960s SadeÕs work became widely available and acquired a new glamour. Gonzague Saint Bris, the author of a recent biography of Sade, sees his influence in the sexual revolution of the 1960s.8 
As a twenty-year.old during the May 1968 student riots in Paris, Saint Bris recalls, ÔI looked at all the placards, reading ÒIt is Forbidden to Forbid,Ó and ÒDo Whatever You Desire.Ó I suddenly understood that our revolutionary phrases were actually from Sade. I began to see a phantom wearing his powdered wig standing on the barricades beside me!Õ9 

Sade maintains a chic reputation in some quarters today, so much so that one of the marquisÕs living descendants, the Count de Sade, has been able to capitalise on the family name to produce a line of Maison de Sade luxury goods, including wine, scented candles, and Ð in honour of the bicentennial of his death Ð a bust of the marquis that retailed for US$5,700.10 
In that year, several prestigious Parisian museums put on exhibitions to commemorate SadeÕs life and work.11 
As far as I can tell, all of these eminent defenders of Sade know full well what he got up to in real life Ð the fact that he imprisoned, raped and tortured many prostituted women and servants, including several children, and that these victims most certainly did not consent to what was done to them and told the 
authorities as much after they had escaped. From the age of thirty-seven, Sade spent much of his life in prison and was then able to perpetrate his violent fantasies only in print. In his magnum opus, 120 Days of Sodom, Sade fantasises about horror upon misogynist horror. If he had been free to, it seems likely that his violent sexual adventures and murderous fantasies would ultimately have escalated to actual murder, and his victims would probably have been found among the same poor women and children he persecuted in the years before his imprisonment. SadeÕs eighteenth-century setting may give him an air of otherness, but he was really no different from any modern sex offender with a taste for torture and mutilation. Angela Carter might as well have penned a hymn to the Yorkshire Ripper and called it The Sutcliffean Woman. 
Feminists such as Carter may have been fooled by SadeÕs dark mystique, but Andrea Dworkin was not. Writing in 1979, Dworkin saw Sade for what he was Ð an aristocratic psychopath who used his sex, wealth and power to gain access to the bodies of the poor: 
Those leftists who champion Sade might do well to remember that prerevolutionary France was filled with starving people. The feudal system was both cruel and crude. The rights of the aristocracy to the labor and bodies of the poor were unchallenged and not challengeable. The tyranny of class was absolute. The poor sold what they could, including themselves, to survive. Sade learned and upheld the ethic of his class.12 

On Easter Sunday in 1768, Sade came upon one of his victims, a widow called Rose Keller, when she was begging on the streets of Paris, having been made destitute after her husbandÕs death. He offered her work as a housekeeper and she went with Sade to his house, where he whipped and badly injured her. Keller later said that she believed Sade would kill her, and when she managed to escape from his house she ran half naked and in terror until she found refuge with some local women, who alerted the police.13 

It is no coincidence that Keller was poor. It is no coincidence that Sade was able to avoid imprisonment by paying her off. It is no coincidence that he abducted her on Easter Sunday, since Sade was aroused almost as much by blasphemy as he was by misogyny, and this anti-clerical instinct has done much to increase his reputation among atheist intellectuals of the modern era. To such intellectuals, SadeÕs victims are made invisible Ð dismissed as mere servants and whores, now long dead Ð and his rebellion against the conservative mores of his time is valorised. Dworkin had it right when she wrote of the ÔfreedomÕ that Sade represents to his fans: ÔSade suffered because he did what you want to do; he was imprisoned as you might be imprisoned. The ÒyouÓ is masculine. The freedom Sade is credited with demanding is freedom as men conceive it.Õ14 


Choking 
If only DworkinÕs analysis had won out. Unfortunately, among most twenty-first-century feminists, Carter is triumphant. The masculine freedom represented by Sade Ð the freedom to hurt, degrade and humiliate Ð is available to sample by both men and women in our newly liberated sexual culture, but with just one change: unlike Sade, todayÕs sadists are obliged to seek consent. And that, weÕre told, makes all the difference. 
Roxane Gay, for instance, in her bestselling book Bad Feminist, 
offers a directive that sounds simple enough: For people who enjoy BDSM, thereÕs this thing called consent, which should always exist in human interactions, but which is exceedingly important when you entrust your body and mind to someone else in such ways. You can say, ÔI want you to hurt me,Õ or ÔI want you to humiliate me,Õ or ÔI want you to dominate me,Õ and someone else will do so. But, and this is important, when you say, in some form or fashion, stop, the pain or humiliation or domination stops, no questions asked.15 

Gay is personally a fan of BDSM and, in a recent anthology of short stories on the theme, she writes about a man who takes pleasure in slapping his wife, strangling her with a belt, and scarring her back with a razor blade.16 
By the end of the story we discover that the man is in fact transgender, which supposedly transforms the nature of the coupleÕs abusive sex. 
Of all of the sex acts associated with BDSM, strangulation is currently the most fashionable and also the most gendered. In porn, men strangle men, men strangle women, but women are very rarely the ones doing the strangling. Strangulation outside of sex is also gendered, with the vast majority of victims being female and the vast majority of perpetrators being male. One study in San Diego found that, of 300 forensic records reporting strangulation, 298 involved a man strangling a woman. And it is a crime that is very often suffered by victims of domestic violence, most of whom are women. 

The UK domestic abuse charity Refuge reports that 48 per cent of women using their services report having been strangled, choked or suffocated, and women who have previously been strangled by their partners are eight times more likely to be killed by them, often by strangulation, since this is the second most common method of murder used by men against women in the UK.17 
Scrolling through ÔchokingÕ porn and seeing image after image of men with their hands around womenÕs throats, anyone not trained in the ideology of liberal feminism would be forgiven for seeing nothing more than bog-standard male violence against women Ð the kind of violence that feminists are supposed to be united against. 
The trend for sexual strangulation has not confined itself to porn. Research conducted by ComRes in 2019 found that over half of eighteen-to 24-year-old UK women reported having been strangled by their partners during sex, compared with 23 per cent of women in the oldest age group surveyed, aged thirty-five to thirty-nine.18 
Many of these respondents reported that this experience had been unwanted and frightening, but others reported that they had consented to it, or even invited it. 
And here lies the complication, because you donÕt have to look hard to find women who say they love being strangled, and these willing women Ð girls, really, many of them Ð are held up as mascots by those who defend the fashion for sexual strangulation. The argument from liberal feminists such as Roxane Gay is that, since there are some women who enjoy being strangled, it is wrong to condemn strangulation per se Ð it is only non-consensual strangulation that deserves our condemnation. It is exactly the same argument that we have come across earlier in this book: with consent, anything goes. 
In July 2020, for instance, MenÕs Health magazine ran a feature titled ÔBreath play is a popular form of BDSM. HereÕs how to do it safelyÕ,19 
and when Member of Parliament Laura Farris criticised the article for being anti-feminist, she was met with a huge backlash on Twitter, largely from young women who insisted that consensual strangulation can be a harmless form of kink. Gigi Engle, a sex writer for MenÕs Health, joined FarrisÕs critics in tweeting ÔNope. Laura, sweetie, choking can be a very fun Sex act when done safely and consenually [sic].Õ20 

But Engle is wrong on this. An alarming study from 2020 reveals the range of injuries that can be caused by non-fatal strangulation, including cardiac arrest, stroke, miscarriage, incontinence, speech disorders, seizures, paralysis, and other forms of long-term brain injury.21 
Although it takes several minutes to actually kill someone by strangulation, unconsciousness or Ôchoking outÕ can occur within seconds and always indicates at least a mild brain injury. Dr Helen Bichard, the lead author of the study, reports that the injuries caused by strangulation may not be visible to the naked eye, or may only become evident hours or days after the attack, meaning that they are far less obvious than injuries such as wounds or broken bones, and so may be missed during a police investigation. 
Bichard rejects on medical grounds the idea that strangulation can ever be done safely, describing this as an urban myth: ÔI cannot see a way of safely holding a neck so that you wouldnÕt be pressing on any fragile structures.Õ22 
And, given the possible consequences of strangulation, until recently only partially understood, Bichard argues that the vast majority of laypeople are not capable of giving truly informed consent to it. 
The MenÕs Health piece got something else wrong, too, by suggesting that strangulation is arousing primarily because Ôcutting off the brainÕs oxygen supply can cause feelings of lightheadedness.Õ This bio-medical attempt to explain the fashion for sexual strangulation is quite common and is appealing in its simplicity, but it leaves out a crucial factor. It is certainly true that a fetish for auto-erotic asphyxiation is attractive to some men, and, every now and again, men with a sexual interest in strangulation will be found dead, having accidentally killed themselves during a misjudged masturbation session.23 

But a fetish for strangling oneself is vanishingly rare among women, so much so that I have not been able to find a single case in the UK of a woman accidentally killing herself during an auto-erotic asphyxiation attempt gone wrong, with the notable exception of 21.year-old Hope Barden, who died in 2019, having been paid to hang herself on webcam by Jerome Danger, a sexual sadist obsessed with extreme porn.24 

If it is really true that women are drawn to strangulation because of the high induced by oxygen deprivation, then why is it that women are not strangling themselves alone, but instead are asking their male partners to do it to them? The answer is straightforward enough: because these women are not getting off on the lack of oxygen, but instead on the power play. 
Sadly, images of strangulation shared or liked by women on social media, discussions between women on platforms such as Reddit and Twitter, and testimony that IÕve heard directly from many young women all suggest that many of the women who seek out strangulation have a very particular Ð and very misguided Ð understanding of what strangulation means when men do it to them during sex. 
To put it bluntly, many of these women are as deluded as the victim of domestic violence, described by Theodore Dalrymple earlier in this chapter, who Ôimagines Ð falsely Ð that a punch in the face or a hand round the throat is at least a sign of his continued interest in her.Õ They think strangulation indicates a manÕs love, passion and desire for them. More often than not, it indicates none of these things, but, in a culture in which the differences between male and female sexuality are routinely denied, particularly by liberal feminists, it shouldnÕt surprise us that many of these young women take the lead from erotic fiction such as Fifty Shades and misinterpret aggression from their male partners as a sign of passion, not realising that real-life Christian Greys usually have no interest whatsoever in the wellbeing of the women they (to use a nasty piece of porn terminology) ÔhatefuckÕ. 
Dr Scott Hampton is a clinical psychologist and director of Ending the Violence, an American organisation committed to addressing gender-based violence. Hampton has spent more than thirty years running offender treatment programmes inside American prisons and has collected a long and dispiriting series of accounts from domestic violence perpetrators, some of whom discuss their reasons for strangling their partners during sex.25 
These accounts provide a far more candid insight into the motivations of men who strangle women than any erotic fiction ever could. 
HamptonÕs patients do not strangle out of love or out of any desire to heighten their partnerÕs pleasure. They do it to show how powerful they are: ÔNo better way to get her full attention, especially when she realizes I could end her life in a snap, literallyÕ, says one man. ÔThe look of terror in her face is such a rush. She canÕt help but look at you. YouÕre right thereÕ, says another. For a man with a fragile ego, strangulation can be appealing as a way of displaying absolute strength and dominance over a woman who is then forced to look right into his eyes. 

We CanÕt Consent to This 
Even if you accept the liberal feminist claim that it is possible for someone to truly and meaningfully consent to being strangled by their sexual partner, you are still faced with the problem of how the law is supposed to differentiate between consensual and non-consensual instances of sexual violence. Emmett, a piece of English case law from 1999, highlights the difficulty. The case involved a man who poured lighter fluid over his partnerÕs breasts and then set her alight, causing third-degree burns. The woman visited her GP for treatment of the injury, and the GP Ð suspecting domestic violence Ð took the unusual step of violating patientÐdoctor confidentiality by making a report to the police. The woman refused to give evidence when the case came to court, and her partner insisted that she had consented to everything that he did. 
What is the court to do, in such a case? As Jonathan Herring, 
professor of law at the University of Oxford, explains: 
In cases where a domestic abuser is charged with assaulting 
their partner where there are proven injuries, explaining the 
injuries as the results of consensual sadomasochism is one of the 
few defences available to them and if the victim is too scared to 
give evidence, then it will be a hard defence for the prosecution 
to rebut.26 

Even if the victim in Emmett had been willing to give evidence and had supported her partnerÕs account, the court might still have been unsure as to whether her consent was truly free, since, as Herring points out, Ôthere are uncomfortable links between the cases where an abuser has sought to control his victim and every aspect of her life, and cases where a BDSM master has sought control of his slave.Õ27 
From the outside, a consensual BDSM relationship and an abusive relationship look exactly the same, and so if a sub is injured or killed during a sexual encounter, and her dom claims it was an accident, how exactly are the courts supposed to tell the difference? 
This is not a theoretical problem. The We CanÕt Consent to This campaign, which IÕve worked on, has documented sixty-seven cases in the UK in which people have been killed and their killers have claimed that their deaths were the result of a sex game Ôgone wrongÕ. All suspects in these killings have so far been male, and sixty of those killed have been female. Most of the victims died from strangulation, although a significant minority suffered serious genital trauma. Most of the victims were the wives or girlfriends of perpetrators, and often there was evidence of domestic abuse. Other women had only met the perpetrators that day, and a large number of victims were involved in the sex trade. 
There are two striking trends in the data weÕve collected. Firstly, the number of rough sex cases has increased significantly since the turn of this century; secondly, defendants who rely on this defence have increasingly been meeting with success, with roughly half of these homicide cases now ending without a conviction for murder. Put differently, within the last two decades, courts have become much more willing to believe defendants when they claim that their victims died because they literally Ôasked for itÕ. 
Some of the sentences handed down in these cases have been shockingly light. For instance, three cases in 2018 resulted in a manslaughter conviction after defendants relied on a Ôrough sex defenceÕ when charged with murder. John Broadhurst was sentenced to 3 years 8 months when his girlfriend Natalie Connolly died in his home from a combination of intoxication and vaginal haemorrhage, having been violently penetrated by Broadhurst with a bottle of carpet cleaner.28 
Jason Gaskell was sentenced to 6 years when he slit the throat of Laura Huteson during sex, using a knife he kept under his pillow.29 
And Mark Bruce was also sentenced to six years after he picked up a seriously drunk Chloe Miazek from a bus stop, took her back to his home, and strangled her to death (BruceÕs barrister said in court that Ôit would seem to be a complete coincidence that Mr Bruce met another person who shared his interest in that particular activityÕ).30 

Feminists in other parts of the world have also documented a rise in the use of the rough sex defence, with similar cases found in Canada,31 
Italy,32 
Russia,33 
Mexico,34 
Germany35 
and the United States.36 
The increasing popularity and success of the Ôrough sex defenceÕ internationally seems to be a result of the fact that courts are increasingly willing to believe that women not only consent to, but actually seek out, the kind of violence that can prove lethal. The phenomenon thus provides compelling evidence of the large-scale consequences of the normalisation of BDSM. 
This normalisation is glaringly obvious online, where BDSM content, particularly content featuring strangulation, has migrated from niche porn sites to mainstream porn sites, and now to social media, including platforms that advertise themselves as suitable for children aged thirteen and over. On Instagram, there are tens of thousands of sexualised choking images available with hashtags such as #chokeme, #chokeher, #neckfetish, #breathplay and #chokeherout. On Pinterest there are images of children being gripped by the throat. One picture on Tumblr showed a bed with rose petals spelling out the words Ôbruise my oesophagusÕ.37 
On these platforms, strangulation of women is presented as loving, sexy, stylish, desirable and sometimes amusing, and images are almost always taken from the perspective of the person doing the strangling. 

You do not have to go searching for these images. If you are exposed to mainstream porn, or even just to mainstream social media, you are very likely to come across them without meaning to. A Sunday Times article from January 2020 Ð illustrated, of course, with an image from Fifty Shades Ð quotes a young student who reports that she started seeing strangulation material on Tumblr from the age of fourteen: 
IÕd inadvertently see a lot of pornographic material because accounts would use the hashtags of other popular TV shows or media to bring followers to their porn sites É After my experiences with Tumblr, I felt that choking was normalised as a sexual behaviour. ItÕs shown as an expression of passion and itÕs something that girls are kind of groomed into doing, but itÕs only recently that I see that being critiqued as something criminal.38 

Porn platforms profit from a process of escalation, introducing users to milder content, and then Ð for those who are susceptible Ð suggesting more and more extreme and addictive content as the viewer is gradually desensitised. For many users, that desensitisation leads inexorably towards BDSM, and, once a taste for creative forms of violence and degradation has developed, it may not stay confined to solitary fantasy. 
One convicted domestic abuser interviewed by Dr Scott Hampton gives the game away when he confesses that ÔI never would have thought of [strangulation] until I saw it in a porno,Õ and the huge age skew in the survey data on sexual strangulation lends weight to his claim. Is it really plausible that all of these young people spontaneously decided that strangulation was, as Gigi Engle describes it, Ôa very fun Sex actÕ? Or could the fact that this generation is the first to have been raised on online porn also be playing a role? 
This is hard to prove for certain either way. There is no randomised double blind trial proving the link between porn use and sexual behaviour, and there never will be, says Clare McGlynn, professor of law at Durham University. But McGlynn draws a comparison with advertising: ÔItÕs not that I watch adverts and then go out and buy a particular washing powder. But on some level it is having some influence on me, and companies spend billions on advertising.Õ39 
The comparison is a good one, but it also returns us to the troubling issue that I raised in the last chapter, because companies selling washing powder are responding to demand, and so, IÕm sorry to say, are porn producers. Strangulation is a fashion spread by porn, but it is an elaboration on a theme that the porn industry did not create. That theme centres around violent men who are aroused by domination and insecure women who seek it out. It is the same theme we see in Fifty Shades, and sometimes in Mills & Boon novels. It isnÕt new, but it has been horribly exaggerated in the modern world. 
And the liberal feminist appeal to consent isnÕt good enough. It cannot account for the ways in which the sexuality of impressionable young people can be warped by porn or other forms of cultural influence. It cannot convincingly explain why a woman who hurts herself should be understood as mentally ill, but a woman who asks her partner to hurt her is apparently exercising her sexual agency. Above all, the liberal feminist faith in consent relies on a fundamentally false premise: that who we are in the bedroom is different from who we are outside of it. 

In a recent piece, the Sunday Times advice columnist Dolly Alderton repeated this foolish idea in her response to a letter by a 29-year-old woman concerned that she was repeatedly Ôdrawn toÕ misogynist men: 
I think everyone should be free to separate their sexuality from their politics, as long as every party has consented and is having fun. WhatÕs important is that you donÕt confuse your craving for sexual objectification or domination with a need for a misogynistic or dominating boyfriend É Put simply: you need a kind, chill, respectful boyfriend in the streets and a filthy pervert in the sheets. They do exist. I hope you have fun finding one.40 

AldertonÕs recommendation was that her respondent seek out casual sex on dating apps with men who are willing to act like dominating misogynists in the bedroom but who are also ÔniceÕ. ItÕs hard to think of a worse piece of advice. Liberal feminists such as Alderton are not only telling young women to meet up with strange men from the internet for sex, they are also telling them to pre-select those men on the basis of their desire for violence. 
Any man who can maintain an erection while beating up his partner is a man to steer well clear of, but those with an interest in masochism donÕt want to hear that kind of grim truth, and those with an interest in sadism donÕt want to be forced to repress their desires. So the palatable option for liberal feminism is to draw a bright line between a personÕs sexuality and their politics and then appeal desperately to ÔconsentÕ in an attempt to ride the tiger of male sexuality. The problem is that, while masochistic women may want to play at being raped, they do not want to actually be raped. And yet seeking out a man who is turned on by violence may well result in exactly this outcome. 
When the musician Andy Anokye (also known as Solo 45) was accused of assaulting a number of women Ð committing acts that included strangling them, waterboarding them, and holding a gun to one womanÕs head and a cloth soaked in bleach to the face of another 
Ð he offered a simple explanation for his behaviour: it turned him on. This twenty-first-century Marquis de Sade told Bristol Crown Court in 2020 that he was aroused by dacryphilia, a fetish for terrified sobbing, which had motivated him to seek out victims to terrorise sexually. One victim told the court that AnokyeÕs abuse had been so bad that at one point she had Ôwanted to dieÕ.41 

AnokyeÕs defence team claimed that the five women who gave evidence against him had all consented to the acts of violence he inflicted, but Ð thankfully Ð the jury were not convinced by this narrative. In March 2020, he was unanimously convicted of twenty-one rapes, five counts of false imprisonment, two counts of assault by penetration, and two of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. He will serve at least twenty-four years in prison.42 


During their investigation, detectives used video recovered from AnokyeÕs phone to track down other women who had been subjected to his violence. Several of these women gave evidence for the prosecution, but one did not. Detectives described the videos featuring this woman as ÔviolentÕ and ÔbrutalÕ, but she rejected that characterisation, telling the court, as a witness for the defence, Ôit wasnÕt a rape Ð I consented to this behaviour and the activity.Õ43 

LetÕs pretend for a moment that every one of AnokyeÕs victims had responded to his violence just as this woman responded to it. She experienced exactly the same kind of abuse as the other women, but, for whatever reason, she didnÕt object to it. Liberal feminists would have us believe that if, by chance, all of his victims had felt this way, then Anokye would have done nothing wrong. His actions would no longer be shocking, misogynist and criminal. They might even be considered revolutionary, just like SadeÕs (ÔDo Whatever You DesireÕ read the placard at the 1968 student protest that SadeÕs biographer, Gonzague Saint Bris, so admired Ð a piece of advice that Anokye followed to the letter). 
This cannot hold. Either Anokye is a villain, or he isnÕt Ð his villainy canÕt be dependent on whether or not he was lucky in his choice of victim and happened to choose a woman who wouldnÕt complain when strangled, waterboarded and suffocated with bleach. The liberal feminist analysis of sexual violence is not only wrong but dangerous. It tells people Ð mostly men Ð that, if they discover in themselves a desire to hurt other people, they shouldnÕt resist it but should instead cultivate it, locking themselves into a cycle of positive reinforcement in which arousal in response to violence is rewarded 
by orgasm. And it tells people Ð mostly women Ð with masochistic impulses that these desires, too, should be encouraged. That instead of running in terror from men with a taste for violence Ð as Rose Keller ran from Sade through the streets of Paris Ð women should instead stay and feed this taste, giving the sadist exactly what he wants, until one day his desires are no longer confined to the bedroom, and he no longer stops at ÔnoÕ. 

Notes 
1. 

Gemma Askham, ÔAnn Summers now has a real life Red RoomÕ, 11 April 
2017, 
www.glamourmagazine.co.uk/article/fifty-shades-red.
room-ann-summers. 


2. 

Theodore Dalrymple, Life at the Bottom: The Worldview that Makes the Underclass. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2001, pp. 75Ð6. 

3. 

Ibid., p. 78. 

4. 

Andreas Wismeijer and Marcel van Assen, ÔPsychological characteristics of BDSM practitionersÕ, Journal of Sexual Medicine 10 (2013): 1943Ð52. 

5. 

Angela Carter, The Sadeian Woman: An Exercise in Cultural History. London: Virago, 1979 [Kindle edn, location 360]. 





18. 

Alys Harte, ÔA man tried to choke me during sex without warningÕ, 28 November 2019, www.bbc.com/news/uk-50546184. 


19. 

Suzannah Weiss, 21 July 2020, https://www.menshealth.com/sex-women/a33382089/breath.
play-erotic-asphyxiation-bdsm/. 


20. 

See https://twitter.com/GigiEngle/status/1286391789352620044. 

21. 

Helen Bichard, Christopher Byrne, Christopher W. N. Saville and Rudi Coetzer, ÔThe neuropsychological outcomes of non-fatal strangulation in domestic and sexual violence: a systematic reviewÕ, Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 12 January 2021. 

22. 

Interview with Helen Bichard, 30 July 2020. 

23. 

A. Coluccia, M. Gabbrielli, G. Gualtieri et al., ÔSexual masochism disorder with asphyxiophilia: a deadly yet underrecognized diseaseÕ, Case Reports in Psychiatry (2016) article 5474862; www.hindawi.com/journals/crips/2016/5474862/. 


24. 

Martine Berg Olsen, 26 June 2019, https://metro.co.uk/2019/06/26/webcam-girl-21-died-pervert.
paid-strangle-watched-online-10077321/?ito=cbshare. 


25. 

See www.endingtheviolence.us/articles.html. 

26. 

Jonathan Herring, ÔR v. Brown (1993)Õ, in Philip Handler, Henry Mares and Ian Williams (eds), Landmark Cases in Criminal Law. Oxford: Hart, 2017, pp. 348Ð9. 

27. 

Ibid., p. 350. 

28. 
Kate 
Dennett, 
23 
July 
2020, 
www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article.
8552589/Businessman-killed-lover-used-rough-sex-defence.
FREED-two-years.html. 

29. 

Lucy Leeson and Danya Bazaraa, 20 August 2018, www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/laura-huteson-death-killers.
brutal-13109002. 

30. 

See www.pressandjournal.co.uk/fp/news/aberdeen/1448323/sex.
strangler-jailed-for-killing-20-year-old-chloe-miazek/. 



31. 
Dennett, 23 July 2020. 
32. 

Barbie Latza Nadeau, 5 February 2014, www.thedailybeast.com/iranian-found-in-venice-lagoon-alleged.
victim-of-botched-sex-game? 
account=thedailybeast&medium=twitter&source=socialflow. 


33. 

Will Stewart, ÔTwisted tortureÕ, 27 August 2018, www.thesun.co.uk/news/7108595/suspect-paedo-dumps-teens.
body-pavement-bdsm/. 


34. 

Richard Hartley-Parkinson, 18 May 2016, https://metro.co.uk/2016/05/18/psychologist-dies-after-asking.
flatmate-to-strangle-her-during-sex-5889007/. 


35. 
See 
www.pnn.de/kultur/ueberregional/trauerspiel-alexander.
und-natalia-ein/21848546.html 
[in 
German]. 

36. 

Serina Sandhu, 24 September 2015, www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-man.
disembowels-woman-uttering-wrong-name-during-sex.
10512965.html. 


37. 

Fiona MacKenzie, ÔWe CanÕt Consent To ThisÕ briefing document, 2020; see https://wecantconsenttothis.uk/press. 

38. 

Rosamund Urwin and EsmŽ OÕKeeffe, 26 January 2020, www.thetimes.co.uk/article/social-media-make-girls-think.
choking-during-sex-is-normal-0jlrgf2b0. 


39. 

Interview with Clare McGlynn, 29 May 2020. 

40. 
Dolly 
Alderton, 
18 
April 
2021, 
www.thetimes.co.uk/article/dear.
dolly-im-a-feminist-so-why-am-i-only-attracted-to-misogynists.
20cgws8z8. 

41. 

ÔGrime artist Solo 45 Òchoked woman with collarÓÕ, 16 December 2019, www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-50816008; ÔGrime artist Solo 45 Òwaterboarded victimÓÕ, 28 November 2019, www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-50591539; 
ÔGrime artist Solo 45 Òheld gun to head of rape victimÓÕ, 6 December 2019, www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-50690488; 
ÔSolo 45 trial: grime artist a Ònarcissist and bullyÓÕ, 12 February 2020, www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-bristol-51478517; Geoffrey Bennett, 
30 
July 
2020, 
www.bristolpost.co.uk/news/bristol.
news/solo-45-rape-court-case-4378719. 


42. 

Claire Hayhurst and Emma Flanagan, 24 February 2020, www.bristolpost.co.uk/news/bristol-news/solo-45s-defence.
claims-four-3881370; 
ÔSolo 
45 
trial: 
grime 
artist 
jailed 
for 
raping 
four 
womenÕ, 
30 
July 
2020, 
www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england.
bristol-53593983. 





43. 
See 
www.enfieldindependent.co.uk/news/18229785.police.
pushed-woman-allege-raped-grime-artist-solo-45-court-told/. 


People Are Not Products 
Wherever armies are to be found, brothels are to be found also, and often with more or less explicit sanction from military authorities. For British Army officials in the 1880s, for instance, the necessary link between prostitution and the colonial project was simply common sense. The vast numbers of British men stationed in India needed to be provided with prostitutes, and the authorities would rather not have an epidemic of venereal disease on their hands. Thus there was a procurement system put in place. A circular memorandum from the quartermaster general, dated 1886, decreed that Ôit is necessary to have a sufficient number of women [and] to take care that they are sufficiently attractive.Õ1 

To acquire these women Ð described in this same memorandum as Ôconvenient arrangementsÕ Ð British officials would typically show up in Indian villages and flourish a government order for prostitutes. ÔThe poor people are afraid to refuse or resist; their daughters are delivered up,Õ2 
reported one medical officer. These young women Ð many of them below the age of consent in Britain at the time Ð were bought for 3 rupees apiece and then kept effectively imprisoned in the army brothels. 
The madams took their clothes away on arrival, leaving them with only a translucent gown that would be conspicuously scanty if they ever ventured out on the streets, making escape difficult. The girls were also controlled through economic coercion, since they were required to pay a daily fee for their lodging, and this fee was made deliberately higher than the tiny sums they were paid by punters, meaning that a prostitute accumulated debt the longer she ÔworkedÕ, tying her to the brothel forever.3 

We know these details about the misery of these long-dead women only because of the efforts of Josephine Butler, an English campaigner whom we might now describe as a ÔfeministÕ, although the word was not in use at the time. Butler did not accept the male need for Ôconvenient arrangementsÕ. To her mind, these Indian prostitutes were Ôthe women of a conquered race oppressed by their conquerorsÕ,4 
and she worked alongside other campaigners to successfully end the British ArmyÕs practice of institutionalised sexual slavery. 
Butler is not remembered kindly by most twenty-first-century liberal feminists. Alison Phipps, professor of gender studies at the University of Sussex, describes ButlerÕs movement in a paragraph dense with scare quotes: TodayÕs reactionary feminists are descendants of nineteenth-century Ôvice-fightersÕ, Christian moralists and anti.miscegenationists, the bourgeois women enlisted by Fordism to ÔimproveÕ the working class, and those who ran the reformatories for ÔwaywardÕ Black girls and who abused them Ôfor their own goodÕ. And the lineage is not just ideological. The Magdalene Laundries in Ireland, built in the eighteenth century to house Ôfallen womenÕ, have more recently become Ruhama, an outreach organisation for women in prostitution. Anti-trafficking campaigns were prefigured by the Ôwhite slaveryÕ panics associated with nineteenth-century temperance.5 

To ÔwaywardÕ, ÔimproveÕ, Ôvice-fightersÕ, Ôfallen womenÕ and Ôwhite slaveryÕ we might also add terms such as ÔrescueÕ, ÔvirtuousÕ and Ôa life of sinÕ Ð all vocabulary used by nineteenth-century campaigners, and all now rejected by a new generation of feminists who regard prostitution very differently, and who are not only appalled by the abuses committed by some Victorians but are also allergic to their entire worldview. 
In particular, the religious inflection of Victorian moralising is anathema to a determinedly secular contemporary feminist movement. Josephine Butler was a Christian, and her faith was the key driving force in her work. And although she was both a slavery abolitionist and an early supporter of womenÕs suffrage Ð two issues that place her on Ôthe right side of historyÕ from the vantage point of today Ð she is also condemned on other counts. One historian, for instance, describes ButlerÕs campaign against the army brothels as dependent on an Ôimage of a helpless Indian womanhoodÕ and describes Butler as a collaborator Ôin the ideological work of empireÕ.6 
YouÕd never guess, reading her modern critics, that ButlerÕs goal was to stop British men raping Indian girls. 
I refuse to condemn Butler or to put sneering scare quotes around the terminology that she and her allies used to describe their work. Yes, she used the Bible in her attempts to help women out of prostitution, quoting from the gospels as she sat on the floor and picked oakum with people confined to English workhouses. And, no, she didnÕt manage to tear down the British Empire, or even to stray far outside of the imperialist paradigm. But then she also took destitute women and girls into her home and nursed them as they died from venereal disease contracted through prostitution, and how many twenty-first-century feminists can boast of similar deeds? 
If we are to understand the workings of the sex trade within their historical context, we should look to Josephine Butler before we look to her modern critics, because to succumb to chronological snobbery in this case is to commit a fatal error. Prostitution has never been a matter of personal choice or female empowerment. Rather, the role of ÔbuyerÕ versus ÔsellerÕ has always been determined not only by sex but also by race, nationality and Ð above all Ð class. 
An ancient solution 
Earlier in this book, I laid out the ways in which average male and female sexuality differ, and I made the case for this difference being a product of evolution rather than merely culture. One of the most important differences between the sexes is that men are higher in the quality that psychologists call ÔsociosexualityÕ Ð the desire for sexual variety. This means that, on average, men are much more likely than women to desire casual sex. 
This sexuality gap produces a mismatch between male and female desire at the population level. There are a lot more straight men than there are straight women looking for casual sex, meaning that many of these men are left frustrated by the lack of willing casual partners. As we have seen, in the post-sexual revolution era, the solution to this mismatch has often been to encourage women (ideally young, attractive ones) to overcome their reticence and have sex Ôlike a manÕ, imitating male sexuality en masse. The thesis of this book is that this solution has been falsely presented as a form of sexual liberation for women, when in fact it is nothing of the sort, since it serves male, not female, interests. But one of the points I have been keen to stress throughout is that, although our current sexual culture has significant problems, this does not mean that the sexual cultures of the past were idyllic. All societies must find some kind of solution to the sexuality gap, and those solutions can be anti-woman in many diverse ways. 
Our modern solution is to encourage all women, from every class, to meet the male demand for casual sex. In contrast, the solution adopted by most societies in the period before the invention of reliable contraception was for the majority of women to have sex only within marriage (whether that be monogamous or polygynous), while a minority of poor women were tasked with absorbing all that excess male sexual desire. Aside from a handful of high-class courtesans and call girls who might attain some degree of social status Ð usually having come from poor backgrounds originally Ð the prostituted class has historically been composed of women with no other options: the destitute, those abandoned by their partners, those addicted to drugs or alcohol, and those captured in warfare or tricked by traffickers. Prostitution is an ancient solution to the sexuality gap, and it is not a pleasant one. 
ItÕs very difficult to explain the wretchedness of the prostituted class if you believe the modern liberal feminist claims about the sex industry. Why would women be so profoundly averse to selling sex if it were not really any different from selling some other product or service? And why would Indian families want either to Ôrefuse or resistÕ when British Army officials came for their daughters? 
Liberal feminists attempt to explain this phenomenon as a result of stigma. They point out that prostitution is stigmatised, which is true, and they argue that stigmatisation makes life difficult and dangerous for prostitutes, which is also true, but they donÕt explain why the stigma would arise in the first place, except to suggest, as does the sex-positive historian Kate Lister, that Ôcultures that repressed sexualityÕ are to blame, because, Ôas patriarchal, puritanical attitudes towards sex developed in the West, womenÕs sexuality came in for particular censure.Õ7 

Some liberal feminists go even further. One 2014 academic paper, for instance, titled ÔSex work undresses patriarchy with every trick!Õ argues that: ÔIt is precisely because sex work constantly challenges patriarchy, stereotypes and the normative understanding of feminine sexuality that it evokes a sense of unease and agitation amongst those seeking to bear the torch of patriarchy.Õ8 
But ÔpatriarchyÕ (if by this we mean a social system that prioritises male interests over female ones) does not necessarily demand the censure of female sexuality at all, at least not consistently. Men might not want their wives or daughters to have illicit sex, but they are often quite happy for the wives and daughters of other men to do so. Which means that reserving a prostituted class for the purposes of male enjoyment suits male interests very nicely. Why, then, would Ôpatriarchal, puritanicalÕ ideology explain the intense and cross-cultural reluctance that women almost always feel when faced with the prospect of becoming a member of this class? 

There is a much more convincing explanation for the deeply visceral aversion that women typically feel in relation to prostitution. As I laid out in chapter 
2, our evolutionary history has led to men and women pursuing different reproductive strategies as a consequence of their different reproductive roles. As the evolutionary biologist David Buss writes: 
From the moment of conception, when the one tiny sperm joins the nutrient-rich egg, women are already contributing much more than the man. The asymmetry in investment does not end there. It is the woman who incubates the fertilised egg within her body. It is the woman who transfers calories from her body through the placenta to the developing embryo É It is the woman who bears the burden of nine full months of pregnancy, an astonishingly long investment compared to most mammals.9 

Given all this, is it any surprise that women are picky about who they have sex with? In a world without reliable contraception, the decision to have sex is far more consequential for a woman than it is for a man, since the possibility of an unwanted pregnancy leaves her with some very stark options: raising a baby without support from a mate, an attempted abortion, or infanticide. In our speciesÕ history, women have never had the option to rip and run. 
The Pill has existed for seventy years, while Homo sapiens has existed for approximately 200,000 years. We evolved in an environment in which sex led to pregnancy, and these psychological adaptations remain with us. Of course nature can be overcome, to an extent Ð we all live modern lives that are very different from those of our ancient ancestors Ð but it is very hard to remove deeply embedded adaptations from the human mind. 
Emotionally, if not legally, it is difficult to distinguish prostitution from rape. The feminist campaigner Rachel Moran, who was in prostitution from the age of fifteen through to twenty-two, describes her own emotional response as identical to that experienced during sexual abuse: I felt the same sickening nausea and rising panic that is inherent to conventional sexual abuse in each prostitution experience I ever had, and I felt that regardless of whether or not a man stayed within the agreed sexual boundariesÉ. When we understand that the sex paid for in prostitution shares so many of its characteristics with the sex stolen in rape, it makes sense that so many prostituted women make clear parallels between the two experiences.10 

The whole point of paid sex is that it must be paid for. It is not mutually desired by both parties Ð one party is there unwillingly, in exchange for money, or sometimes other goods such as drugs, food or shelter. The person being paid must ignore her own lack of sexual desire, or even her bone-deep revulsion. She must suppress her most self-protective instincts in the service of another personÕs sexual pleasure. This is why the sex industry typically attracts only the poorest and the most desperate women Ð these are the people who donÕt have the means to resist it. 
Prostitution denies women what they are evolved to want: the opportunity to choose their mates. Instead, prostitutes are forced to have unwanted sex with men that they do not find even remotely attractive. And, in the era before reliable contraception, unwanted pregnancy was often the result, as is evident from archeological evidence such as that found in an excavation in Buckinghamshire, England, which uncovered ninety-seven infant skeletons buried under a Roman brothel.11 
Even in the modern world, in low-and middle-income countries, where access to contraception can be unreliable, female prostitutes have about a one in four chance of being impregnated by a client in any given year.12 
Sex may be meaningless fun for the clients, but it is neither fun nor meaningless for the women, or for the children they bear. 

$20 and $200 
There is a strange thing that happens in the political discourse on the sex industry. Usually, people who identify with the liberal left are concerned with championing the interests of the most economically marginalised people Ð the poor over the rich, the worker over the boss, and so on. But when it comes to prostitution, that position is slyly reversed. Rather than talking about the women at the bottom of the industry Ð the very poor, drug addicted or trafficked Ð it is more common to see liberal feminists drawing attention to those in the most elite slice of the industry. It is the highest earning, rather than the lowest earning, who find themselves with the most vigorous allies on the left. 
I donÕt dispute that there are some self-described sex workers who are not in poverty and who, moreover, not only support the decriminalisation of prostitution on empirical grounds but also insist that sex work is just like any other kind of work. These women are particularly prominent in the media and on platforms such as Twitter. Compared with other women in prostitution, they are disproportionately likely to be white, Western and university educated. Furthermore, by definition, those speaking freely and publicly about their experiences in the industry are not being tightly pimped, are fluent in English, and have access to the internet. They are representative only of the most comparatively fortunate end of 
the sex-work spectrum. In contrast, the women who campaign for the so-called Nordic model, which criminalises buyers and pimps but decriminalises sellers, tend to have different biographies. They are much more likely to have left the sex industry before beginning campaigning work and to have been in brothel-and street-based prostitution rather than escorting or camming. They are also much more likely to have been born in poverty. 
This is an observation that many advocates of decriminalisation find annoying. Juno Mac and Molly Smith, for instance, the authors of Revolting Prostitutes: The Fight for Sex WorkersÕ Rights, describe the bind in which they find themselves, with their views as sex workers instantly discredited because of their class backgrounds: ÔMany sex worker activists find that their testimonies are dismissed in feminist spaces on the grounds that, by virtue of being activists, they are not representative; that they speak from an exceptional, privileged and anomalous perspective.Õ13 


Mac and Smith both have PhDs, but, even without knowing this information about their biographies, their middle-class accents would give them away. As would mine, of course Ð as a columnist and author, I am speaking from a platform to which the vast majority of people simply do not have access. By definition, this is a public discussion to which only the relatively privileged can contribute. 
But it is important to pay attention to the class backgrounds of activist sex workers, not as a ÔgotchaÕ to shut down discussion, but because oneÕs economic interests have a profound effect on oneÕs personal preferences. Once you start paying attention, you notice how many of these activists have had an unusual experience of the sex industry. Julie Bindel, the investigative journalist and campaigner against sexual violence, writes of some of the most prominent voices in media discussions of the sex industry: 
Many of those high-profile pro-prostitution lobbyists who speak 
as Ôsex workersÕ are what I would call ÔtouristsÕ. Melissa Gira-
Grant for example, who is highly educated and earning her living 
as a journalist; Brooke Magnanti, who holds a PhD, has written 
several books, and works as a scientist; and Douglas Fox, whose 
partner owns one of the largest escort agencies in Britain, are 
not representative of the sex trade.14 

This sleight of hand is partly enabled by the fact that the term Ôsex workerÕ has such a loose meaning. Sometimes it might refer Ð as in MagnantiÕs case Ð to what is sometimes called Ôfull contactÕ sex work. Others Ð such as Gira-Grant Ð may have only ever done cam work. Most egregiously, a man such as Douglas Fox is also able to describe himself as an Ôindependent male sex workerÕ and can even retain a prominent position in the International Union of Sex Workers, despite the fact that he is actually a pimp.15 

Within the academy, it is particularly common to see researchers describe themselves as Ôsex workersÕ while being deliberately vague about the exact nature of their involvement in the industry. When the phrases Ôlisten to sex workersÕ and Ôspeaking as a sex workerÕ carry such a premium, itÕs unsurprising to see such claims bandied around by people who might be better described as (to use BindelÕs 
phrase) ÔtouristsÕ. This is a longstanding issue in the sex workersÕ rights movement. One of the first and most influential organisations advocating for the full decriminalisation of prostitution was COYOTE (Call Off Your Old Tired Ethics), founded in San Francisco in 1973 and often described in the media as Ôthe first prostitutesÕ unionÕ.16 
But when the sociologist Elizabeth Bernstein conducted eighteen months of fieldwork among prostitutes in San Francisco, she found the COYOTE membership to be highly unrepresentative: 
The vast majority of COYOTEÕs members are white, middle-class and well-educated, just as their political opponents claim. They are predominantly call-girls, escorts, exotic dancers and masseuses; a few are fetish specialists, such as dominatrixes or ÔswitchesÕ (who alternate between domination and submission). Many work out of expensively-furnished homes or rented Ôwork spacesÕ by placing advertisements in newspapers, earning enough money not only to cover expenses, but also to help finance alternative artistic and intellectual careers É The average hourly fee, whether or not one is Ôin business for herself,Õ is $200. 
Bernstein described COYOTEÕs monthly meetings, in which: New members often introduce themselves by telling their 
Ôcoming outÕ stories (ÔI graduated from Smith College with a BA 
in philosophy, then I moved here to become a sex-workerÕ) and 
are met with hearty applause. Being a sex-worker is about taking 
pleasure in sex, unleashing repressed energies, or exploring the 
socially-deemed dangerous border zones of eroticism. 
This is in contrast to the prostitutes Bernstein described as being at Ôthe other end of the continuumÕ: homeless women, addicted to crack or heroin, who would sell sex for $20 and then immediately spend the proceeds on drugs. Most of these women were tightly controlled by pimps and were visibly sickly and distressed.17 

Elizabeth Bernstein is a long way from being a sex trade abolitionist, and I imagine she would strongly disagree with much of what I have to say in this book.18 
Nevertheless, she draws attention to a problem with the discourse on the sex industry that typically goes unacknowledged. The directive Ôlisten to sex workersÕ is commonly used by the decriminalisation lobby, but which ones? 

Luxury beliefs 
The psychologist Rob Henderson has coined the term Ôluxury beliefsÕ to describe the kind of ideas and opinions that confer status on the rich at very little cost while taking a toll on the poor.19 
These are, he theorises, a form of Veblen good, named for the sociologist Thorstein Veblen Ð that is, products that do not obey the usual rules of supply and demand but instead are desired by consumers because they are expensive, rather than in spite of this fact. But as luxury consumables have become easier to manufacture and thus more affordable, the rich have had to cast around for new Veblen goods. Therefore, writes Henderson: 
The affluent have decoupled social status from goods, and re.attached it to beliefs É The logic is akin to conspicuous consumption Ð if youÕre a student who has a large subsidy from your parents and I do not, you can afford to waste $900 and I canÕt, so wearing a Canada Goose jacket is a good way of advertising your superior wealth and status. Proposing policies that will cost you as a member of the upper class less than they would cost me serve the same function. 
In the elite circles of the media, NGOs and top universities, repeating a phrase such as Ôsex work is workÕ confers status on the speaker. It suggests an admirable open-mindedness, a rebellious attitude towards bourgeois sexual norms, and an empathetic relationship with the imagined figure of Ôthe sex workerÕ Ð that is, an independent entrepreneur who doesnÕt mind the sex itself but does mind the intrusion of the state into her business. Proponents of this luxury belief may share hashtags on Twitter such as #supportsexworkers and #decrimnow, and they will tell anyone who disagrees with them to Ôlisten to sex workersÕ, but they will typically never have met or spoken with anyone who has experienced $20 prostitution, or perhaps even $200 prostitution. But since the term Ôsex workerÕ collapses the two categories together, the class distinctions can be easily obscured. 
But that doesnÕt mean that the class distinctions go away. Support for the decriminalisation and normalisation of prostitution may not obviously look like a luxury belief, since proponents will typically use the vocabulary of oppression and marginalisation. But in effect it is a luxury belief, since the costs are not borne by the upper classes who gain status by expressing support for such a policy but instead by the lower class people Ð overwhelmingly women Ð who are most likely to actually end up in the sex industry. 
Decriminalisation or legalisation of the sex industry increases the demand for commercial sex. In countries that have adopted these legal models, the proportion of the male population who have ever bought sex is higher, and the sex tourism industry is larger. Given that the number of women who will willingly enter the sex trade is very small, when demand grows, unwilling women must be sought out in order to meet it. 
In the global sex industry, it is poor countries that provide the ÔproductÕ and rich countries that provide the demand. The brothels of the UK, Netherlands and Germany are filled with women from poor parts of the European Union, in particular Romania, as well as women from West Africa and Southeast Asia,20 
some of whom have been forcibly trafficked, while the rest are there as a result of varying degrees of poverty. Meanwhile, the brothels of Bangkok that cater for tourists are filled with sex buyers from Europe, Australia and North America. The buyers tend to have lighter coloured skins than the sellers because sex is sold in only one direction along the economic gradient. 
Walk through Patpong, one of BangkokÕs most popular red-light districts, and you will see a lot of white men. The same was true during the Vietnam War, when Bangkok was one of the preferred destinations for American soldiersÕ week of ÔR&RÕ: officially, ÔRest & RecuperationÕ, unofficially, ÔRape & Run.Õ21 
The historian Meredith Lair describes the American militaryÕs implicit sanction of prostitution during the war: 
At euphemistic massage parlors and steam baths all over South 
Vietnam, soldiers could get fellatio or intercourse for as little as 
$2. Military authorities dismissed brothels on American bases 
with a nod and a wink, providing medical care to prostitutes and 
Johns alike, which sent a strong signal to American soldiers that 
their exploitation of Vietnamese women was not only excused 
but also sanctioned as a bonus for a yearÕs worth of service.22 

Sex tourism destinations still cluster around US military bases. In Korea, thousands of women Ð including 5,000 Filipinas and even more Russians Ð are located around the bases, and there is pressure to ÔimportÕ younger and younger women from more ÔexoticÕ backgrounds to meet the demand for variety.23 
The British Army officials in the 1880s who procured young Indian women for their soldiers were conforming to an historical norm. 
Many sex buyers are deeply and profoundly racist and make no effort to conceal this fact, speaking openly and in crude terms about their contempt for the women from whom they buy sex. Both in online reviews and in interviews with researchers, race is featured prominently in buyersÕ assessments of the ÔproductÕ, and it is not uncommon to come across nasty pieces of racist slang Ð LBFM (Ôlittle brown fucking machinesÕ) is, for instance, used to refer to Southeast Asian women. ÔI made a list in my mind,Õ reports one London sex buyer. ÔI told myself that IÕll be with different races, e.g. Japanese, Indian, Chinese É Once I have been with them I tick them off the list. ItÕs like a shopping list.Õ24 

Some advocates of decriminalisation or legalisation are sanguine about this racialised dynamic, pointing out that there are plenty of other industries in which migrant workers predominate. And although they do recognise that selling sex is risky Ð with a homicide rate many times higher for prostituted women than for non.prostituted,25 
as well as a shockingly high all-cause mortality rate due to drug and alcohol related deaths26 
Ð they point out that it is not the only line of work that comes with danger. Brooke Magnanti, for instance, a former escort who writes under the pen name Belle de Jour, compares a career selling sex to a career as a deep-sea fisherman Ð both dangerous options, yes, but both legitimate forms of work.27 

When this idea is taken to its logical conclusion, we end up with the sterile language of business introduced to the brothel or the alleyway. In academic writing that attempts to impose this framework, pimps and madams engage in Ôsex work managementÕ,28 
rape becomes a Ôcontract breachÕ,29 
and violence, pregnancy and disease become Ôoccupational health risksÕ.30 
The horror of what is actually happening is deliberately obscured, because weÕre not supposed to feel horror. The cerebral, liberal thing to do is to resist such 
emotional impulses and regard prostitution as much the same as deep-sea fishing, only with an added layer of pointless stigma Ð a relic from less enlightened times. 

The redistribution of sex 
Throughout this book, IÕve used the term Ôsexual disenchantmentÕ to describe both an historical process and a political claim. IÕve borrowed the term from Aaron Sibarium, who writes: 
Where past sexual regimes constrained who could have sex with whom, and for what ends, todayÕs attacks such constraints as benighted and domineering Ð promising, like classical liberalism, to let individuals do as they please. A marriage, a one-night stand, a Ôthrouple,Õ a hook-up, a brothel: these are all equally valid means of getting sex, which has no inherent value beyond what consenting adults assign to it. If the scientific revolution disenchanted the world, a la Weber, the sexual revolution disenchanted sex in the process of deregulating it.31 

Liberal feminism incorporates sexual disenchantment as an article of faith, insisting that it is a good thing that sex is now regarded as without inherent value in the post-sexual revolution era. But, in practice, liberal feminist women do not generally behave as if they believe in the truth of sexual disenchantment. Almost no one does. 
Sexual disenchantment is often appealed to by those who support the legalisation or decriminalisation of prostitution. It is common to hear proponents of this view compare sex work to other forms of work and challenge their critics to name the difference. This rhetorical move is effective only because it relies on a collective effort to believe in sexual disenchantment. If you want to be a good liberal, then youÕre not supposed to believe that sex has some kind of specialness to it that makes it different from other acts. 
But even the best liberals do still feel that sex is somehow different, even if they struggle to articulate the difference. People care if their partner has sex with someone else, and not only because doing so involves breaking a promise. A quick browse of any online polyamorist forum will uncover a lot of people who are trying very hard to practise Ôethical non-monogamyÕ and yet are tormented by sexual jealousy. 
And people know intuitively that a boss asking for a blow job in exchange for a promotion is entirely different from a boss asking for overtime in exchange for a promotion. I find it perplexing that so many liberal feminists who argue vigorously that Ôsex work is workÕ are hyper-sensitive to any suggestion of sexual impropriety in their own workplaces. These women recoil at being asked out for dinner by a male colleague or being touched casually on an arm or leg, describing such acts as Ôsexual harassmentÕ. But if that is sexual harassment, then how should we describe what goes on in a brothel? 
Cynically, I suspect that the different attitude towards these two kinds of workplace comes down to self-interest. I donÕt mean to suggest that middle-and upper-class women donÕt suffer from the costs of the sexual revolution, because of course they do. Hook-up culture also has a pernicious effect on Ivy League and Russell Group campuses, and the boyfriends of economically privileged women are 
just as likely to be addled by porn as any other men. But there are certain forms of sexual harm that are far more threatening to people who are simultaneously young, female and poor. Prostitution is one of them. And it is telling that, when the terrible consequences of sexual disenchantment are likely to personally affect women who are not otherwise at risk of ending up in prostitution, the inconsistency is laid bare. 
For instance, in recent years there has been much media outrage in response to instances of landlords offering young would-be tenants Ôsex for rentÕ arrangements. Liberal publications such as Glamour magazine describe such offers as ÔsickeningÕ and ÔterrifyingÕ,32 
while The Guardian bemoans the fact that Ômore is not being doneÕ to prosecute landlords who post such ads.33 
The Labour Party has promised to act on the issue if returned to government by introducing a specific offence in relation to offering Ôsex in lieu of rentÕ,34 
and the Liberal Democrats support this call for a new law.35 

A spokesperson for Rape Crisis England & Wales points out that Ôagreeing to have sex with someone under the pressure and fear of homelessness, or in exchange for the basic right to have somewhere to live, does not equate to agreeing by choice É Any sexual activity without consent is a very serious sexual offence.Õ36 
And yet this is a feminist organisation that states on its website that Ôjust because you are or have been involved in the sex industry, does not mean that you have experienced sexual violenceÕ37 
Ð in other words, selling sex for money can be done with consent, but selling sex for rent cannot. And while Labour and the Liberal Democrats are apparently appalled at the Ôsex for rentÕ phenomenon, the latter are officially in favour of decriminalising the sale of sex for cash,38 
and the previous leader of the former Ð Jeremy Corbyn Ð has stated that he considers the decriminalisation of the sex industry to be the Ômore civilisedÕ option.39 



Why should exchanging sex directly for money be decriminalised and destigmatised, whereas exchanging sex for accommodation should not? We are all quite happy to recognise that rent has a cash value when it comes, for instance, to negotiating nanny contracts. Forgive me for being cynical, but could it be because we are in the midst of a housing crisis, which means that middle-class young women Ð the daughters of politicians and journalists Ð are newly anxious about their ability to pay rent? With that anxiety made more acute by media coverage that often highlights the particular vulnerability of students to Ôsex for rentÕ proposals, with Ôsordid offers [found] across university cities, including Oxford, Bristol and BrightonÕ Ð cities home to some of the most prestigious universities in the UK.40 

Or take, as another example of liberal feminist inconsistency, the panic around incels: involuntarily celibate men who gather online to complain about their lack of success in attracting girlfriends. In 2018, the libertarian economist Robin Hanson wrote a blog post in which he voiced sympathy for incels: One might plausibly argue that those with much less access to sex suffer to a similar degree as those with low income, and might similarly hope to gain from organising around this identity, to lobby for redistribution along this axis and to at least implicitly threaten violence if their demands are not met É Sex could be directly redistributed, or cash might be redistributed in compensation.41 

All hell broke loose on progressive media. Slate asked if Hanson was ÔAmericaÕs Creepiest EconomistÕ42 
and Moira Donegan in Cosmopolitan expressed outrage: 
Central to the incel ideology is the idea that sex with another person Ð specifically, penetrative sex with women Ð isnÕt a privilege for men, but a right. Incels talk about sex with ÔStacys,Õ their term for attractive women, the way that more reasonable people talk about food, water, and shelter: as a basic necessity for survival É Women are not interchangeable, we are not commodities.43 

Obviously I agree. I donÕt think that incels are owed sexual access to anyone, whether or not Ôcash is redistributed in compensationÕ. But note the difference in tone between a passage such as this Ð Ôwe donÕt owe you sexÕ and Ôour vaginasÕ Ð compared to other progressive pieces on sex work, including those written by Donegan or published in Slate and Cosmopolitan. When it is the sexual integrity of prostituted women thatÕs at stake, a ruthless pragmatism takes hold, and liberal feminists are concerned only with reducing the harm resulting from stigma. But when it is non-prostituted women whose bodies are at risk of ÔredistributionÕ, suddenly sexual disenchantment is forgotten, to be replaced by pure rage. How dare incels think that beautiful women would even give them the time of day? 

This is the rage that comes from knowing, deep down, that sex is different from other forms of social interaction, which also means that selling sex is inherently different from any other kind of act. Vednita Carter, prostitution survivor and anti-sex trafficking activist, puts the point succinctly: ÔPeople ask me Òwhat is the inherent harm of prostitution?Ó Ð the inherent harm is the sex act itself.Õ44 


Cultural death grip syndrome 
ÔDeath grip syndromeÕ is a quasi-medical term used to describe the impotence that can result from excessive porn use. ItÕs partly a physical problem caused by aggressive masturbation leading to desensitisation, but itÕs also partly a psychological problem caused by an overload of sexual stimuli. Sufferers of death grip syndrome Ð almost all of them men Ð become incapable of having sex with a real person because their responses have been gradually deadened. 
In chapter 
5 
I wrote about the fact that porn seems to have a paradoxical effect on users, incentivising them to have less sex with real people while simultaneously exposing them to more intense sexual stimuli. That paradoxical effect does not confine itself to the privacy of the userÕs bedroom. As public life has become ever more hyper-sexualised, I propose that we have entered an era of cultural death grip syndrome. We are now routinely exposed to so much sexual stimuli in the course of daily life that it no longer has much 
effect on us. When Wonderbra released their famous ÔHello BoysÕ ad campaign, featuring Eva Herzigov‡ admiring her own boosted cleavage, the posters were so distracting to motorists that they reportedly caused car crashes. That was in 1994. In contrast, try walking down any British high street today and keep a tally of how many lingerie-clad boobs and bums you see within a ten-minute interval: in shop windows, on the sides of buses, and on the covers of newspapers and magazines. 
My local shopping centre currently has on display a six-foot-high photo of a model in a swimsuit licking the inside of another modelÕs open mouth. This is far raunchier than the 1994 ÔHello BoysÕ photo, but I would never usually have noticed it, since such images are so common now that they are little more than wallpaper. In a free market, with no moralising impediment, sexualisation will go in one direction, and one direction only, and for a simple reason: sex sells, and businesses know it. 
Occasionally, a new cultural event will push at the boundaries of propriety with enough alacrity to attract attention. Most recently, the music video for the song ÔWAPÕ (ÔWet Ass PussyÕ), by the American rappers Cardi B and Megan Thee Stallion, was praised by liberal commentators, who interpreted the pornified aesthetic and explicit lyrics as, in the words of one Guardian columnist, Ôan unabashed celebration of female sexualityÕ.45 


But this was a strange kind of celebration. Even if we assume that the repeated use of the word ÔwhoreÕ in the lyrics is to be taken figuratively, there is plenty else in the track to suggest a transactional attitude towards sex. The male object of lust described in the lyrics is assessed according to two standards: the size of his Ôking cobraÕ and the size of his bank balance. ÔPay my tuitionÕ, pleads Megan to this imagined man, who must Ômake it rainÕ if he wants her sexual favours. ÔAsk for a carÕ during sex, Ôspit on his micÕ to secure a record deal, Ôlet me tell you how I got this ringÕ Ð the sexual generosity described is all in service not of female pleasure but of material gain. 
ÔWAPÕ has very little to do with authentic female sexuality, but it does provide a very revealing insight into the worst side of male sexuality 
Ð specifically, a compulsive and dehumanising side of male sexuality that is readily exploited by those in search of profit. Because, while there are almost no women who really believe in the idea of sexual disenchantment, even if they pretend otherwise, there is a minority of men who do believe in it, at least up to a point. They care about youth, and they care about looks, but otherwise they donÕt care who theyÕre ejaculating into, and they certainly donÕt care if that person is enjoying themselves. If given the chance, these men will treat their sexual partners as unfeeling orifices. Remember the memorandum from the quartermaster general in 1886, quoted at the beginning of this chapter: Ôit is necessary to have a sufficient number of women [and] to take care that they are sufficiently attractive.Õ46 
That is the punterÕs view of the matter. 
This is a form of male sexuality that many women do not understand, since it is so different from typical female sexuality. But anyone who questions its existence should take a look at the comments that men leave on sites such as Punternet which are dedicated to customer reviews of prostitutes. A project put together by a group of Canadian feminists called ÔThe Invisible MenÕ (since replicated in other countries) collects quotes from these sites to demonstrate how little regard punters have for the people to whom they buy sexual access.47 
It doesnÕt make for nice reading. 
Cultural pornification puts the logic of these men at the helm. It takes a Ð frankly Ð psychopathic view of human sexuality and allows it to leach out into public life. It treats people as fungible Ð that is, replaceable and interchangeable: in sexual terms, merely a collection of relevant body parts. A tongue that could belong to anyone licking the inside of a mouth that could belong to anyone. It is sex stripped down to its barest mechanics. 

ÔThanks to OnlyFansÕ 
Only a culture in thrall to the worst of male sexuality could have eroticised the dick pic and its amputated female counterparts. I donÕt know what men think we are supposed to do with their dick pics, but I know of no woman who would masturbate to an image in which the rest of the person has been cropped away, leaving only a slab of flesh ready to be laid out on the anatomistÕs table. Typical female sexuality isnÕt orientated towards these kinds of images. But the internet abounds with them. 
Many young women on social media have progressed smoothly from posting selfies Ð the subject of much media discussion only a decade ago Ð to posting ÔbelfiesÕ (butt selfies). Instagram and TikTok, in particular, are filled with the youthful breasts and buttocks of women desperate for some positive male attention. For some of these women, posting sexualised images of themselves online can set them on a path towards setting up an account on OnlyFans, a platform that allows ÔcreatorsÕ (overwhelmingly women) to earn money by giving ÔusersÕ (overwhelmingly men) subscription access to online content, most of which is pornographic. If you are already used to marketing sexy photos of yourself for ÔlikesÕ, marketing those photos for actual money may not seem like an especially consequential step. 
And the incentives are attractive. Every now and again, a tweet by a previously unknown OnlyFans creator will go viral, as she (always she) shares photos of the house she has been able to buy Ôthanks to OnlyFansÕ. But, as the blogger Thomas Hollands has found in his detailed analysis of the OnlyFans model, such rags-to-riches cases are very unusual.48 
The distribution of income on OnlyFans is highly unequal, with the top 1 per cent of creators making 33 per cent of all the money. Using the Gini index Ð a standard measure of economic inequality Ð Hollands finds OnlyFans to be significantly more unequal than South Africa, the most unequal country in the world. The tiny minority of creators who do well on the site are mostly existing celebrities, meaning that the women who post Ôthanks to OnlyFansÕ success stories on social media are not at all representative of ordinary creators but, rather, more like those rare customers who walk out of a casino millionaires, having put it all on 
red. In fact, most of the women on OnlyFans probably make a loss, given the amount of time they must spend creating content and engaging with users. The median creator attracts only thirty subscribers, but she carries just as much risk of public exposure and harassment as her more successful counterparts. OnlyFans is not anything like as dangerous as street-or brothel-based prostitution Ð itÕs definitely more like $200 than $20 prostitution Ð but it does come with perils, primarily to a womanÕs long-term relationship prospects, which are key to her long-term happiness. 
As I laid out in chapter 
4, 
most 
men 
take 
a 
very 
negative 
attitude 
towards what they consider to be a history of promiscuity in a potential marriage partner, even if they donÕt necessarily admit to this publicly. This means that, although an OnlyFans account may provide a woman with a short-term injection of self-esteem, and perhaps also an injection of cash, it will also limit the pool of men who are willing to marry her, because OnlyFans is to the marriage market as a criminal record is to the jobs market. 
And there are other costs associated with turning yourself into a sexual commodity. The supermodel Emily Ratajkowski, widely considered to be one of the most beautiful women in the world, writes in her autobiography My Body about the dysfunction that results from seeing oneself always through a commercialised lens. For instance, Ratajkowski insists on watching herself in the mirror when she has sex with her husband, Ôso that I can see that IÕm real.Õ49 

SheÕs aware that this isnÕt healthy. But, in an age of dating apps, it isnÕt only supermodels who end up with their sexuality warped by a sexual marketplace that turns people into products. Tinder and its rivals are not dissimilar from shopping sites. The format encourages users to browse the available merchandise and select their preferred options from the comfort of their homes, with very little effort and no intimacy whatsoever. 
In a 2015 article on dating apps in Vanity Fair, one male user 
describes the voracious impulse that the apps encourage: ÔGuys view everything as a competition,Õ he elaborates with his deep, reassuring voice. ÔWhoÕs slept with the best, hottest girls?Õ With these dating apps, he says, ÔyouÕre always sort of prowling. You could talk to two or three girls at a bar and pick the best one, or you can swipe a couple hundred people a day Ð the sample size is so much larger. ItÕs setting up two or three Tinder dates a week and, chances are, sleeping with all of them, so you could rack up 100 girls youÕve slept with in a year.Õ 
Another interviewee is explicit about his instinct towards sexual consumerism, comparing Tinder to an online food delivery service Ð Ôbut youÕre ordering a person.Õ50 
This is, by his reckoning, a good thing. 
And yet, despite all this convenience, Tinder causes its users more unhappiness than almost any other app.51 
In a further iteration of cultural death grip syndrome, users report that dating apps manage to turn what should be an exciting experience into a dull and depressing one, because an overabundance of options does not 
increase the sexual thrill but instead kills it. I donÕt need to tell readers that street-and brothel-based prostitution is dangerous and traumatic. If youÕre reading this book, itÕs unlikely that you need to be persuaded on that point. But I think I do need to warn against the consequences of sexual disenchantment that go beyond the obvious. This means that, on a personal level, we canÕt just refuse to participate in the sex industry and then pat ourselves on the back for a job well done. IÕve made it clear already that I donÕt think itÕs possible to use porn ethically, and of course IÕd apply that same rule to prostitution. But refusing to view people as products goes further than that: it demands that we challenge the disenchanted idea of what sex ought to be. 
The very many articles with such headlines as Ô8 very necessary sex tips from sex workersÕ and Ô5 insightful sex tips from a professional sex workerÕ52 
betray a view of sex that is becoming disturbingly prevalent. Sex workers can act as sources of sex advice only if we understand sex to be a skillset that must be learned and refined across different partners, with good sex a result not of intimacy but of good technique. In this framing, sex becomes something that one does to another person, not with another person. All of the emotion is drained away, leaving the logic of the punter triumphant. 
We must resist that logic at all costs. If we try and pretend that sex has no special value that makes it different from other acts, then we end up in some very dark places. If sex isnÕt worthy of its own moral category, then nor is sexual harassment or rape. If we accept that sex 

7. 

Kate Lister, ÔSex and moneyÕ, in A Curious History of Sex. London: Unbound, 2020. 

8. 

Meena Seshu and Aarthi Pai, ÔSex work undresses patriarchy with every trick!Õ, IDS Bulletin 45 (2014): 46Ð52. 

9. 

David Buss, Bad Men: The Hidden Roots of Sexual Deception, Harassment and Assault. London: Robinson, 2021, pp. 15Ð16. 

10. 

Rachel Moran, Paid For: My Journey through Prostitution. Cork: Gill & Macmillan, 2013, pp. 112Ð13. 

11. 

Sam Greenhill, 26 June 2010, www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-1289603/Romans.
killed-100-unwanted-babies-English-brothel.html. 


12. 

F. H. Ampt, L. Willenberg, P. A. Agius et al., ÔIncidence of unintended pregnancy among female sex workers in low-income and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysisÕ, BMJ Open 8 (2018): e021779; doi: 10.1136/bmjopen.2018-021779. 

13. 

Juno Mac and Molly Smith, Revolting Prostitutes: The Fight for Sex WorkersÕ Rights. London: Verso, 2018, p. 18. 

14. 

Julie Bindel, The Pimping of Prostitution: Abolishing the Sex Work Myth. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017, p. 60. 

15. 

Douglas Fox, ÔDonÕt criminalise our clientsÕ, 19 November 2008, www.theguardian.com/profile/douglas-fox. 

16. 

Bindel, The Pimping of Prostitution, p. 22. 






36. 

Ibid. 

37. 

ÔSupport for survivors who are or have been involved in the sex industryÕ, 
2021, 
www.rasasc.org.uk/e-newsletter/outreach-with.
women-in-sex-work/. 



38. 
See www.libdems.org.uk/f9_towards_safer_sex_work. 
39. 

Rowena Mason, 4 March 2016, www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/04/jeremy-corbyn.
decriminalise-sex-industry-prostitution. 


40. 

Susie Coen and Talya Varga, 1 January 2021, www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-9105215/Preyed-sex-rent.
landlords-Men-touting-rooms-exchange-sexual-favours.html. 


41. 

Robin Hanson, 26 April 2018, www.overcomingbias.com/2018/04/two-types-of-envy.html. 

42. 

Jordan Weissmann, 28 April 2018, https://slate.com/business/2018/04/economist-robin-hanson.
might-be-americas-creepiest-professor.html. 



43. 
Moira Donegan, ÔActually we donÕt owe you sex, and we never willÕ, 4 May 2018, www.cosmopolitan.com/politics/a20138446/redistribution-sex.
incels/. 
44. 
Vednita Carter, ÔThe pimping of prostitutionÕ, www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Y-VmuKmsP0. 
45. 
Arwa Mahdawi, ÔThe WAP uproar shows conservatives are fine with female sexuality Ð as long as men control itÕ, 15 August 2020, www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/aug/15/cardi-b.
megan-thee-stallion-wap-conservatives-female-sexuality. 

46. 

Mathers, Josephine Butler, p. 165. 

47. 

See https://invisible-men-canada.tumblr.com. 

48. 
Thomas 
Hollands, 
24 
April 
2020, 
https://xsrus.com/the.
economics-of-onlyfans. 

49. 

Emily Ratajkowski, My Body. London: Quercus, 2021, p. 102. 

50. 

Quoted in James Mumford, Vexed: Ethics Beyond Political Tribes. London: Bloomsbury Continuum, 2020, pp. 77Ð8. 

51. 

See www.humanetech.com/app-ratings. 



52. 
Andre Shakti, Ô8 very necessary sex tips from sex workersÕ, 30 October 
2015, 
www.cosmopolitan.com/sex.
love/news/a48407/sex-tips-from-sex-workers/; Ô5 insightful sex tips from a professional sex workerÕ, https://thoughtcatalog.com/melanie-berliet/2014/10/5.
insightful-sex-tips-from-a-professional-sex-worker/. 



Marriage Is Good 
In making the case against the sexual revolution, IÕve often run across a particular kind of problem that is by no means unique to this subject. I call it the problem of normal distribution. 
The normal distribution is also known as the bell curve because the graph it produces looks rather like a bell. It is a continuous probability distribution that is symmetrical around the mean Ð meaning, in essence, that most of the data points cluster around the middle and, the further a value is from the mean, the less likely it is to occur. The normal distribution is found again and again in the sciences. The sizes of snowflakes, lifetimes of lightbulbs, and milk production of cows are all normally distributed.1 
So are human physical traits such as height, shoe size and birth weight. 
Social phenomena are a little more complicated, but, even so, the normal distribution is often a good approximation for what we see across human populations. Sociosexuality, for instance (an interest in sexual variety), is close to being normally distributed. Most people are close to average, and a minority of unusual people are found at one or other pole, meaning that there are some people who have no interest whatsoever in casual sex, and some people who are off-the.charts horny. Importantly, though Ð as I first laid out in chapter 
2 
Ð the bell curves for men and for women are somewhat different, with the male mean further towards the higher end of the sociosexuality spectrum. This means that there are a lot more super-horny men than super-horny women, and a lot more super-not-horny women than super-not-horny men. 
The problem of normal distribution is this: when you impose some change on a population, different people will experience it differently. It is very, very difficult to design a policy that will home in on just one group of people at just one point on the graph, leaving the rest of the curve unchanged. And when it comes to a big historical event such as the sexual revolution Ð which nobody designed, or even fully foresaw Ð that imprecision is even more marked. 
Marital satisfaction is (almost) normally distributed.2 
Most people report being quite happy in their marriages, with a minority who report being very happy and another minority who report being very unhappy. 
It used to be exceptionally difficult for those very unhappy couples to divorce. Journalist Megan McArdle describes the process of acquiring a divorce in nineteenth-century America: It took years, was expensive, and required proving that your spouse had abandoned you for an extended period with no financial support; was (if male) not merely discreetly dallying but flagrantly carrying on; or was not just belting you one now and again when you got mouthy, but routinely pummelling you within an inch of your life. 
After you got divorced, you were a pariah in all but the largest cities. If you were a desperately wronged woman you might change your name, taking your maiden name as your first name and continuing to use your husbandÕs last name to indicate that you expected to continue living as if you were married (i.e. chastely) and expect to have some limited intercourse with your neighbors, though of course you would not be invited to events held in a church, or evening affairs. 
Financially secure women generally (I am not making this up) moved to Europe; Edith Wharton, who moved to Paris when she got divorced, wrote moving stories about the way divorced women were shunned at home.3 

If you sought a divorce during this period, it was almost certainly because you were at the very unhappy tail of the normal distribution, and thus Ð and I donÕt think this is a controversial statement Ð deserving of help and sympathy. That was certainly the attitude of the social reformers who began to campaign for the liberalisation of divorce laws in the years following the Second World War. From roughly the 1960s onwards, and across the Western world, it suddenly became much easier to get divorced, and people who had been legally trapped in hellish marriages were freed from them, which was a good thing. But then came the problem of normal distribution. 
In reading the parliamentary debates on what would become the 1969 Divorce Reform Act Ð the key piece of liberalising legislation in the UK Ð it does not appear that the supporters of the Bill knew what was coming. They believed that their reforms would be an act of kindness towards the small number of people on the unhappy tail of the normal distribution, but that the rest of the curve would be left intact. ÔThis Bill does not open the door to easy divorce,Õ announced Lord Stow Hill, onetime Attorney General. ÔThat door is wide open now, under the existing law, and it would be hard to open it wider.Õ4 

And yet open it did. In the decade following the Divorce Reform Act, the number of divorces trebled and then kept rising, peaking in the 1980s.5 
Since then there has been a slight decline in the divorce rate, not because of a genuine return to marital longevity but, rather, because you canÕt get divorced if you donÕt get married in the first place, and marriage rates are at an historic low.6 
In 1968, 8 per cent of children were born to parents who were not married; in 2019, it was almost half.7 
Today, there are just two marriages for every divorce in the UK each year.8 
The institution of marriage, as it once was, is now more or less dead. 
In the United States it is deader still. There, almost half of marriages end in divorce,9 
and there is also a new and significant class divide. Before the 1970s, the vast majority of Americans got married and stayed married, regardless of family income. Now, of those Americans in the top-third income bracket, 64 per cent are in an intact marriage, meaning they have only married once and are still in their first marriage. In contrast, only 24 per cent of Americans in the lower-third income bracket are in an intact marriage.10 
A durable marriage is fast becoming a luxury of the upper classes. 

Of course, some marriages should end, and in those cases the liberalisation of divorce laws was a blessing. Although married women are not at greater risk of domestic violence than unmarried women Ð the opposite, in fact11 
Ð it is obviously better when abused wives do not face serious legal obstacles in trying to leave their husbands. The extreme unhappy tail of the normal distribution really did need to get divorced, and, before the reforms of the mid-twentieth century, they often couldnÕt. 
But the problem of normal distribution made it impossible for the reforms to laser in on these extreme cases. Most modern divorces are not a consequence of domestic abuse12 
Ð most involve a couple growing apart, falling out of love, and trying for a fresh start. But, in many of these cases, the promise of happier alternative relationships remains unfulfilled, particularly for women, who are more likely than men to remain permanently single following divorce.13 
WhatÕs more, between a third and a half of divorced people in the UK report in surveys that they regret their decision to divorce.14 
There is a lot of space between ÔhappyÕ and Ôirreparably unhappyÕ. In the past, those people remained married; now they usually donÕt. 
And, in a culture of high divorce rates, even those marriages that last risk being undermined. When marriage vows are no longer truly binding, couples seem to become less confident in their relationships. One study by the American economist Betsey Stevenson, for instance, found that marital investment declined in the wake of no-fault divorce laws, with newly-wed couples in states that passed no-fault divorce about 10 per cent less likely to support a spouse through college or graduate school and 6 per cent less likely to have a child together.15 

When marriage became impermanent, the institution as a whole was changed, and with it much else. I doubt very much that any of the well-meaning reformers of the 1960s ever envisioned such an outcome. Their intention had been a noble one: to offer a way out for people stuck in wretched marriages and to lift the stigma from the then tiny minority unfortunate enough to have been through divorce. But the problem of normal distribution interceded. There was always a threshold of dysfunction above which a marriage was considered beyond saving, and reformers intended to nudge it only a little. But as the marginal divorce made the next one more likely, and the one after that more likely still, that threshold went hurtling downwards at great speed. 
My money, my choice 
Divorce reforms were not solely responsible for the death of marriage, of course. They formed part of a suite of factors, all of which can be traced back to several important material changes of the mid-twentieth century. Lawmakers loosened the limits on divorce because the institution of marriage was already starting to 
stumble. Their reforms acted as a final shove. The most important of these material changes was the invention of the contraceptive pill, which presents a particularly clear example of the sometimes unpredictable consequences of a technology shock. ItÕs odd, in retrospect, that the introduction of a new form of contraception led to an increase rather than a decrease in the number of births out of wedlock, and yet thatÕs exactly what happened. This was because the Pill ended the taboo on pre-marital sex, while not actually providing complete protection from pregnancy. It still doesnÕt, even though it remains the most popular method of prescribed contraception in the UK and the US:16 
with perfect use, the combined contraceptive pill is 99 per cent effective, but with typical use it is 91 per cent effective, meaning that around nine in 100 women taking it will get pregnant in a year.17 
Across a population, that is a huge number of unwanted babies. 
The decriminalisation of abortion across the Western world, which arrived shortly after the introduction of the Pill, provided a Ôback-upÕ option in these cases of contraceptive failure. In the contemporary United States, about half of women who have abortions report that they were using contraception when they became pregnant,18 
and about a quarter of all pregnancies end in abortion. For a married woman who can cope with an ÔoopsÕ baby, the Pill is a good option. But, for everyone else, it doesnÕt actually deliver what itÕs supposed to. And yet it was effective enough to change social norms dramatically. The columnist Virginia Ironside reflected in later life on the effect on young British women of the introduction of the Pill 
and the decriminalisation of abortion: 
It often seemed more polite to sleep with a man than to chuck 
him out of your flat. True, weÕd been brought up to say ÔnoÕ to 
sex, but the only reason for that was because we might get 
pregnant É But now, armed with the pill, and with every man 
knowing you were armed with the pill, pregnancy was no longer 
a reason to say ÔnoÕ to sex. And men exploited this mercilessly. 
Now, for them, ÔnoÕ always meant ÔyesÕ.19 

From the 1970s onwards, it became much less common for women to wait until marriage or engagement before having sex. And while, in theory, the choice to refuse pre-marital sex still existed, in practice it became a much harder option to stick with. In twenty-first-century America, unusually old virgins report being stigmatised by their peers, and they are less favoured as relationship partners.20 
The stigma is stronger for male virgins, but Ð perhaps for the first time historically Ð it clings to female virgins too. 
The sexual revolution gave women the opportunity to make the choice not to wait until marriage because so many people believed that new contraceptive methods meant that extramarital sex no longer carried the risk of an unwanted pregnancy. Of course it still did, but the decriminalisation of abortion was there as a back-up, meaning that no man need ever again fear a shotgun wedding. When motherhood became a biological choice for women, fatherhood became a social choice for men. Or, as the comedian Dave Chappelle has put it (in jest, but describing a very real attitude): ÔNot only do [women] have the right to choose, I donÕt believe they should have to consult anybody except for a physicianÉ. Gentlemen, that is fair. But ladies, to be fair to us, if you decide to have the baby, the man should not have to pay É My money, my choice.Õ21 

Plenty of modern men seem to agree with ChappelleÕs take. Before the death of marriage, only the most flagrant scoundrel would refuse to acknowledge and provide material support to his children if he was in a publicly recognised relationship with their mother at the time of conception. Now, deadbeat dads are commonplace. In the UK, less than two-thirds of non-resident parents Ð almost all of them fathers Ð are paying child support in full.22 
In America, the figure is less than half.23 
Not only are record numbers of children not growing up with a father at home, but many of those children donÕt even get any money out of these absent men. 
Despite the often valiant efforts of single mothers, the data clearly shows that, on average, children without fathers at home do not do as well as other children. As the sociologists Sara McLanahan and Gary D. Sandefur write: 
Children who grow up in a household with only one biological 
parent are worse off, on average, than children who grow up in a 
household with both of their biological parents, regardless of the 
parentsÕ race or educational background, regardless of whether 
the parents are married when the child is born, and regardless of 
whether the resident parent remarries.24 

Fatherlessness is associated with higher incarceration rates for boys,25 
higher rates of teen pregnancy for girls,26 
and a greater 
likelihood of emotional and behavioural problems for both sexes.27 
This is not only because children are denied the material support their fathers might have given them but also because single mothers are obliged to take on the almost impossible task of doing everything themselves: all of the earning, plus all of the caring, socialising, and disciplining of their children. 
Then thereÕs the sometimes malign influence of step-parents Ð mostly, in practice, stepfathers, since in the vast majority of cases it is mothers who are awarded primary custody, and therefore mothers who are likely to bring a new partner into a young childÕs home. Evolutionary psychologists refer darkly to a phenomenon known as Ôthe Cinderella effectÕ: the higher incidences of child abuse by step.parents than by biological parents. The effect is so marked that Steven Pinker has described step-parenthood as Ôthe strongest risk factor for child abuse ever identifiedÕ. A step-parent is forty to one hundred times more likely than a biological parent to kill a child,28 
and stepfathers are also far more likely than genetic fathers to sexually abuse children. 
Stepchildren, on average, find home life more stressful than other children do. They leave home younger and are more likely to report that family conflict was their key reason for moving out. They have chronically higher levels of the stress hormone cortisol. They suffer higher mortality in general, not just from step-parent assaults but also due to an increased rate of accidents. Their step-parents devote fewer resources to their care, including nutritional resources, resulting in their having a shorter average height than their peers of the same age. All of this holds true across cultures.29 

Of course it is sometimes better for children not to live with their genetic fathers, or even have contact with them, particularly if those men are abusive or dangerously unstable. And of course there are plenty of devoted stepfathers and stepmothers who make exceptionally good parents. We are talking about risks here, not absolutes Ð the presence of a step-parent in a young childÕs home increases the risk of bad outcomes, but it certainly does not guarantee them. However, the research findings are not promising, and parents are kidding themselves if they think that a divorce or parental separation will have no impact on their children. One particularly egregious case of self-deception was published in the New York Times in 2021, in a piece by the legal scholar Lara Bazelon in which she described her own experience of divorce: 
To this day, divorce is portrayed as precarious and grim. Parents whose marriages break apart are made to feel they have failed catastrophically. Divorce is shameful, traumatic and Bad For The Kids. 
But IÕve learned that divorce can also be an act of radical self-love that leaves the whole family better off É I divorced my husband not because I didnÕt love him. I divorced him because I loved myself more.30 

Whether or not it is an act of Ôradical self-loveÕ for one or more of the adults, children do not benefit from the divorce of non-abusive parents. The research is unequivocal on this point. And while a parent like Bazelon may be able to cushion the blow to her children by paying for therapy, nannies and private schools, most single 
mothers are not able to do so. As so often, it is poor women who fare worst in the post-sexual revolution era. For one thing, divorce harms mothers financially. As Lenore Weitzman concludes, from her study of divorce in California: ÔFor most women and children, divorce means precipitous downward mobility Ð both economically and socially. The reduction in income brings residential moves and inferior housing, drastically diminished or nonexistent funds for recreation and leisure, and intense pressures due to inadequate time and money.Õ31 

And the situation is even worse for mothers who never get married in the first place. A 2019 BBC documentary about homeless single mothers included an interview with the father of one of the toddlers featured in the programme. Both child and mother were living in a hostel run by the local council, heavily in debt, and surviving on welfare benefits. She desperately wanted to get back with her ex, and he would occasionally swing by the hostel to spend time with their son, making vague promises about them one day living together as a family. Addressing the camera, he explained his view of the situation: ÔItÕs always good to spend time with my kid. I wish that I could see him when I want to see him, but I think sometimes you have to prioritise your lifestyle.Õ32 
Plenty of Ôradical self-loveÕ on display from a man who seemed to be fond of his child and ex-girlfriend, but who wasnÕt willing to make even the most minor sacrifice in order to offer them a stable homelife. And why should he? From his perspective, she was the one who had decided not to have an abortion, and so she must face the consequences alone. 
Which means that she becomes dependent on the state. Here, too, is a social change brought about by a material one. It was the economic boom of the post-war period that made possible the construction of a large welfare state, which then made it feasible Ð although neither easy nor pleasant Ð for poor single mothers to survive without support from the fathers of their children. 
My friend Mason Hartman compares the modern state to a kind of Ôback-up husbandÕ. If called upon, it will feed you, house you, and protect you from violence, but it wonÕt do so especially well. And the state will offer no warmth or companionship alongside these basic necessities. I donÕt suggest for a moment that this Ôback-up husbandÕ ought now to withdraw, because doing so would leave many single mothers and their children destitute. The elaborate system of norms that for centuries held together the taboo on pre-marital sex is now long gone and cannot be readily reconstructed. If the welfare state were to disappear, the result would be misery and mayhem for the most vulnerable members of our society. 
But nor do I think that the Ôback-up husbandÕ is anything like as good as the real thing. Despite all of our efforts, feminists have not yet found a workable alternative to a system that, as it turned out, did serve a purpose in protecting the interests not only of women but also Ð crucially Ð of their children. 
A baby and someone 
Some people consider the death of marriage to be a good thing, and many of those people are feminists. Opposition to marriage was a common theme in much of the writing of the second wave, with feminists including Andrea Dworkin, Germaine Greer and Kate Millett all arguing for its abolition. ÔThe institution of marriage is the chief vehicle for the perpetuation of the oppression of women,Õ insisted the American sociologist Marlene Dixon in 1969, summarising the dominant feminist critique of the time. ÔIt is through the role of wife that the subjugation of women is maintained.Õ33 

But itÕs no coincidence that most of the feminists who opposed marriage never had children. IÕve written earlier in this book about the conflict between liberal feminists and radical feminists on issues such as prostitution and porn, issues on which there are clear and important differences between these two feminist traditions. On motherhood, however, the differences have always been paper thin. Both groups have no answer to the question of how women are supposed to reconcile their search for freedom with a condition that necessarily curtails it. 
If you value freedom above all else, then you must reject motherhood, since this is a state of being that limits a womanÕs freedom in almost every possible way Ð not only during pregnancy but also for the rest of her life, since she will always have obligations to her children, and they will always have obligations to her. ItÕs a connection that is only ever severed in the most dire circumstances. 
Feminists have historically succeeded in challenging this restriction on freedom through advocating for greater availability of contraception and abortion, which has been effective up to a point, in that it has allowed women more of a say in when or if they have children. But what about when the children are actually born? Here, we come upon an anti-natalist streak in both liberal and radical feminist traditions that leaves mothers shut out, which means Ð even with historically low birth rates Ð that at least three-quarters of women are shut out. Motherhood is discussed in fewer than 3 per cent of papers, journal articles or textbooks on modern gender theory34 
Ð but then, less than half of tenured female academics have children,35 
which makes the omission somewhat less surprising. The whole topic has slipped out of sight. 
And no wonder, since the logic of individualism collapses upon contact with motherhood. The pregnant womanÕs frame contains two people, neither of them truly autonomous. The unborn baby depends on the mother for survival, and the mother cannot break this physical bond except through medical intervention that will result in the babyÕs death. Even after birth, the motherÐbaby dyad remains a unit, tied together both emotionally and physically. And, for many years following birth, the young child cannot be understood as an autonomous individual because, without the devoted care of at least one adult, death is a certainty. 
The psychoanalyst and paediatrician Donald Winnicott has written that Ôthere is no such thing as a baby. There is only a baby and someone.Õ The writer Leah Libresco Sargeant expands the point: The liberal theory of the independent individual as the basic unit 
of society is full of exceptions É It would be fairer to say that 
dependence is our default state, and self-sufficiency the 
aberration. Our lives begin and (frequently) end in states of near 
total dependence, and much of the middle is marked by periods 
of need.36 

Some feminists insist that women ought to forego motherhood altogether. Shulamith Firestone, for instance, famously argued in The Dialectic of Sex, first published in 1970, that women could never be liberated from patriarchy without liberation from reproduction itself, and thus she suggested that babies ought one day to be gestated outside of the human body. If women cannot participate in reproduction as men do, Firestone argued, then they should not participate at all. 
This does work up to a point Ð for the individual, at least, if not for the species. But it isnÕt possible to reject dependency altogether because, even if a woman chooses never to have children, she will one day grow old and depend on other people as if she were an infant all over again. Shulamith Firestone herself Ð having become estranged from her family in later life, and having never married or produced children Ð spent the final years of her life in a state of profound vulnerability caused by severe mental illness. She was supported for a time by a network of feminist friends and admirers, but eventually the group dissipated, since they were not tied together by blood or marriage, and relationships based on mutual liking or idealism are not as durable as those that entail a lifelong obligation. Firestone was left uncared for, and she died alone in her home aged sixty-seven, with her body left undiscovered for some days. It was 

assumed by the coroner that she had died of starvation.37 
A modified version of WinnicottÕs proclamation could be applied to almost all adults at some stage of their lives: Ôthere is no such thing as a person. There is only a person and someone.Õ Acting as that ÔsomeoneÕ means giving away some portion of your freedom, which runs counter to what weÕre all supposed to want. Many feminists of the second wave described their goal as ÔwomenÕs liberationÕ Ð womankind was in chains, they said, and those chains had to be broken. 
And that goal was not without merit, given that women are still too often consigned permanently to the role of ÔsomeoneÕ Ð always caring, never cared for. But the solution to this problem cannot be individualism, because the whole concept is based on a lie. In a natural human life cycle, we begin as dependent babies, spend a very brief period as relatively independent young adults, before caring for our own dependent children, and then ultimately ending our lives in what Shakespeare called our Ôsecond childishnessÕ.38 
Modern contraception has allowed us to stretch out that young adult stage artificially, giving the illusion that independence is our permanent state. But it isnÕt Ð itÕs nothing more than a blip, which some of us will never experience at all. Either being Ôa someoneÕ or needing Ôa someoneÕ is our lot as human beings. That means that we have to find a way of being dependent upon one another. 

The protection of an ordinary marriage 
But dependency continues to present problems for feminism, particularly in relation to motherhood. To the extent that either liberal or radical feminism has offered any hypothetical assistance to mothers, it has been assistance located outside of the family and within the bosom of the fully socialised state. The state as back-up husband is tasked with providing institutional childcare in the form of 24/7 day-care centres, which is an elegantly economical model, since, instead of one mother devoted to one child (wastefully, her own), the back-up husband allocates one worker to many children (efficiently, not her own). Mothers can thus return promptly to the workforce and put their tax revenue towards feeding the day-care engine. 
Such a model depends on physically prising apart women from their children, making these two beings as autonomous as possible as quickly as possible. Thus womenÕs freedom is maximised and the mutual dependency of childbearing is resisted, or at least hidden away. What this model doesnÕt offer women is a way of being physically with their children while also being materially and emotionally supported by other adults. 
Some feminists have attempted to resolve this problem through the construction of new, family-like structures. In The Female Eunuch, for instance, Germaine Greer wrote of Ôself-regulating organic familiesÕ, in which groups of women buy a property together and live communally, with the fathers of their children visiting only occasionally39 
and the role of mother frequently ÔdeputisedÕ to others. Writing fifty years after Greer, Sophie Lewis advocates in her book Full Surrogacy Now for Ôgestational communismÕ, in which ÔmotherÐchild bonds can more easily be discontinued, handed over, and multiplied.Õ 

The sociologist Nicholas Christakis observes that the idea of 
collective childrearing was not unique to the radicals of the 1970s: It has been periodically attempted as a desired social disruption since antiquity. Plato believed that raising children communally would result in children treating all men as their fathers and thus more respectfully. Communist societies have also been associated with collective child-rearing; the family is seen as a threat to state ideology because it fosters a sense of belonging to a family unit, and totalitarian ideology requires that family allegiance be subordinated to allegiance to the party or state.40 

But, as Christakis writes, Ôattempts to fundamentally restructure or minimize the bond between parent and child have very rarely, if ever, endured.Õ The reasons for this should be obvious: humans are animals, descended from individuals whose offspring survived to adulthood, and natural selection therefore favours attentive mothers. 
This means that, when social structures fall away, the result is generally that the person left literally holding the baby is the person whose natural instincts make her most devoted to the child. Shulamith Firestone recognised this truth, writing that: ÔSince the relationship Òmother/childÓ remains intact, it is no wonder that when the commune breaks up, all the ÒgodparentsÓ disappear, as well as the genetic father himself, leaving the mother stuck Ð without even the protection of an ordinary marriage.Õ FirestoneÕs argument, of course, is that even communal childrearing does not free women from the oppression of motherhood, and that the whole thing should therefore be rejected. But the phrase Ôwithout even the protection of an ordinary marriageÕ is well put. The reductive feminist analysis of marriage sees it as a method used by men to control female sexuality. And it does do that, of course, but that was never its sole function. There is also a protective function to marriage, but itÕs one that makes sense only when understood in relation to children. 

The faithless soldier 
Marriage used to be defined as a conjugal union, Ôa holy mystery in which man and woman become one fleshÕ, in the words of the marriage service of the Church of England. While of course there were always exceptions to this Ð infertile people were permitted to marry, as were people beyond reproductive age Ð marriage was nevertheless understood to be based, as Robert P. George, professor of jurisprudence at Princeton, puts it, around a coupleÕs Ôsexual.reproductive complementarity É [which was] specially apt for, and would naturally be fulfilled by, their having and rearing children together.Õ41 

For most Westerners, this is no longer what marriage means. The psychologist Eli Finkel has charted the historical development of marriage in the Western world and attributes its changes to changing economic conditions.42 
Before the mid-nineteenth century, the challenge of day-to-day survival, particularly for rural people, meant that assistance with food production, shelter, and protection from violence were what most people prioritised in a spouse. Later, urbanisation and industrialisation led to greater prosperity, and couples had the luxury in their marriages of placing more emphasis on love and companionship. Then, in the affluent 1960s, we entered the era of what Finkel refers to as the Ôself-expressive marriageÕ, in which self-discovery, self-esteem and personal growth became the key markers of a marriageÕs success. 
Where once marriage was all about reproduction and the pooling of resources, it is now more often understood as a means of sexual and emotional fulfilment Ð Ôyour relationship with your Number One personÕ,43 
as the philosopher John Corvino has put it. Thus it is now perfectly intelligible Ð and, in my opinion, good and proper Ð to extend marriage rights to same-sex couples, who necessarily lack Ôsexual-reproductive complementarityÕ. Since the old meaning of marriage is now forgotten, denying same-sex couples the right to marry in the present day is both cruel and nonsensical. 
But we should not make the mistake of misrepresenting the historical function of marriage, and indeed the historical function of the prohibition on pre-marital sex. Modern feminists who have only ever known a world with the Pill can easily forget that, in an era without contraception, a prohibition on sex before marriage served female, not male interests, because it protected the group of people who bear (literally) the consequences of an extramarital pregnancy. 

This point was well understood by feminists who were born long before the PillÕs invention and who knew what an extramarital pregnancy meant for a woman in a society without a welfare state. Yes, itÕs true that part of the harm was done through reputational damage, with single mothers and their children stigmatised by their families and communities. But this social catastrophe was second order to the practical catastrophe of single motherhood itself, which was disastrous enough to result, for some poor women, in a choice between prostitution and starvation, or else other alternatives that were just as terrible: a dangerous attempt at abortion, abandonment of a child to an orphanage or infanticide. The stigma around single motherhood caused a great deal of misery for its many victims. It also existed for a reason: to deter women from making an irreparable mistake for the sake of a worthless man. 
The feminist theorist Mary Harrington uncovers the logic of the old prohibition on extramarital sex within English folksongs about the Ôfaithless soldierÕ and the young woman he seduces: 
Cold Blow and the Rainy Night tells of a soldier who arrives, hat 
frozen to his head, pleading with a young woman to let him in. 
SheÕs eventually persuaded, whereupon one thing leads to 
another. Presumably in the afterglow, she asks him: ÔNow since 
you had your will of me / Soldier will you marry me?Õ. Nope, he 
replies: 
O then she cursed the rainy night 
That ever she let him in Ð O 
Then he jumped out of the bed He put his cap upon his head 
And she had lost her maidenhead 
And her mother heard the din Ð O 
É 
Another song, The Greenwood Side, recounts the story of a young woman who falls pregnant in an illicit affair, is abandoned by her lover, gives birth alone in a wood and conceals the truth by murdering her twin babies. The affair, abandonment, birth and infanticide are briskly narrated, and the body of the song is a hallucinated dialogue with her murdered babies. The deeply unsettling lyrics blend horror at her deed with profound pity for the woman: 
Now, bonny boys, come tell to me 
Oh, the rose and the linsey, oh 
What sort of life IÕll have after dying? 
Down by the Greenwood side, oh44 

Such songs existed to warn young women about the dangers posed by the faithless soldier and his kind. What might nowadays be interpreted as Ôslut shamingÕ, or a fear of female sexual agency, in fact had a very urgent purpose. That purpose is now somewhat anachronistic in an age of contraception, but only somewhat. Illicit affairs do still end in trauma and tragedy because sex is still just as consequential as it ever was. 
Many feminists who lived before the 1960s knew this better than we do now. They looked at the asymmetries inherent in heterosexuality and the grim consequences for women of Ôsexual liberationÕ, and they concluded that the male libido needed containment. Which was why two of the thirteen chapters in Mary WollstonecraftÕs A Vindication of the Rights of Woman were devoted to bemoaning the lack of chastity in men Ð the sex with the higher sex drive Ð and thus Ð to WollstonecraftÕs mind Ð the greater responsibility for containing their passions. ÔVotes for women, chastity for menÕ was a real suffragist slogan, now forgotten.45 



The reinvention of marriage 
But how to persuade men into Ð if not chastity Ð sexual continence? IÕve written earlier in this book about what IÕve called the ÔcadÕ and ÔdadÕ modes of male sexuality, with the former orientated towards casual sex and the latter towards commitment. Although there are some men who are innately and resolutely focused on one or other of these modes, itÕs far more common for men to sit somewhere in the middle, moving between the two depending on their age and social context. 
Having almost reached the end of this book, I hope IÕve managed to persuade you that the cad mode of male sexuality is bad for women en masse. The vast majority of women find it difficult to detach emotion from sex, meaning that an encounter with a cad who doesnÕt call is likely to leave a woman feeling distressed, even if she attempts to repress those feelings. Women did not evolve to treat sex as meaningless, and trying to pretend otherwise does not end well. 
Then there are the physical consequences of sex, which are inherently asymmetrical, with the danger and pain of an unwanted pregnancy borne entirely by the woman. Modern forms of contraception are mostly effective Ð enough, at least, to have transformed sexual relations in the post-1960s era Ð but they still regularly fail. And whatever you think about the ethical status of the foetus, we should all be able to agree that an abortion is not a good thing for a woman to go through, given such medical risks as uterine damage or sepsis, not to mention the emotional consequences, which are not trivial. 
All in all, attempting to mimic the cad mode of male sexuality, as liberal feminism encourages, does not constitute liberation for women. The Hugh Hefners of the world do not quail at the thought of a Ôsexually liberatedÕ womankind. Quite the opposite, in fact. They are delighted to find themselves with a buffet of young women to feast on, all of them apparently willing to suffer their mistreatment without complaint. Looked at in the starkest terms, I canÕt help but agree with the dark pronouncement my grandmother made when I told her about the thesis of this book: Ôwomen have been conned.Õ 
The task for practically minded feminists, then, is to deter men from cad mode. Our current sexual culture does not do that, but it could. In order to change the incentive structure, we would need a technology that discourages short-termism in male sexual behaviour, protects the economic interests of mothers, and creates a stable environment for the raising of children. And we do already have such a technology, even if it is old, clunky and prone to periodic failure. ItÕs called monogamous marriage. 
Before I start sounding too quixotic, I should make one thing clear: lifelong monogamy is not our natural state. Only about 15 per cent of societies in the anthropological record have been monogamous.46 
Monogamy has to be enforced through laws and customs, and, even within societies in which it is deeply embedded, plenty of people are defiant. To date, monogamy has been dominant in only two types of society: small-scale groups beset by serious environmental privation and some of the most complex civilisations to have ever existed, including our own.47 
Almost all others have been polygynous, permitting high-status men to take multiple wives. 
But while the monogamous marriage model may be relatively unusual, it is also spectacularly successful. When monogamy is imposed on a society, it tends to become richer. It has lower rates of both child abuse and domestic violence, since conflict between co-wives tends to generate both. Birth rates and crime rates both fall, which encourages economic development, and wealthy men, denied the opportunity to devote their resources to acquiring more wives, instead invest elsewhere: in property, businesses, employees, and other productive endeavours. 
This is, it seems, the solution to what anthropologists have called Ôthe puzzle of monogamous marriageÕ. How is it that a marriage system that does not suit the interests of the most powerful members of society Ð high-status men Ð has nevertheless come to be institutionalised across so much of the world? The answer is that, although monogamy is less satisfactory for these men, it produces wealthy, stable societies that survive. 
A monogamous marriage system is successful in part because it pushes men away from cad mode, particularly when pre-marital sex is also prohibited. Under these circumstances, if a man wants to have sex in a way thatÕs socially acceptable, he has to make himself marriageable, which means holding down a good job and setting up a household suitable for the raising of children. He has to tame himself, in other words. Fatherhood then has a further taming effect, even at the biochemical level: when men are involved in the care of their young children, their testosterone levels drop, alongside their aggression and sex drive.48 
A society composed of tamed men is a better society to live in, for men, for women and for children. 
The monogamous marriage model is also the best solution yet discovered to the problems presented by childrearing. There was a wisdom to the traditional model in which the father was primarily responsible for earning money while the mother was primarily responsible for caring for children at home. Such a model allows mothers and children to be physically together and at the same time financially supported. In an age of labour-saving devices such as washing machines and gas boilers, it has become less time-consuming to run a household and thus more feasible for mothers of young children to do paid work outside of the home, as most of us do. But attempting to play the traditional roles of mother and father simultaneously Ð as single mothers are forced to do Ð is close to impossible. 
For some women, paid work outside of the home is a joy and a privilege. For many more, it is a responsibility, and often an onerous one. Even those women who enjoy their work are physically incapable of performing it during the early months of a babyÕs life. I should know: I began this book at the beginning of my pregnancy and completed it when my son was six months old. Writing is probably one of the easiest jobs to combine with motherhood, but even so there were weeks on end during which I didnÕt write a word because I was too busy caring for my baby. And while I could be practically supported by other people, including my husband, I was irreplaceable as mother Ð not only because I was the only person who could breastfeed, but also because children have a relationship with their mothers that starts from conception, and that relationship cannot be handed over without distress to both mother and baby. 
If we want to keep that maternal bond intact, then the only solution is for another person to step in during these times of vulnerability and do the tasks needed to keep a household warm and fed. Perhaps we could call that person a spouse. Perhaps we could call their legal and emotional bond a marriage. 
Marriage is an institution that has a way of reinventing itself. In 2020, an initiative set up by a group of American students called the Affirmative Consent Project began marketing a Ôconsent kitÕ, available online for $2.99. This pocket-sized kit contained a condom, two breath mints, and a contract stating that the undersigned had agreed to have sex. Couples were encouraged to take a photo of themselves holding the signed piece of paper. (ÔWhy not invite family and friends to witness the signing?Õ some wags asked. ÔWhy not hire a professional photographer? Dress up? Make an event of it?Õ)49 

Similarly, in 2021, the journalist Julia Ioffe was among the many feminists who responded to the introduction of new restrictions on abortion rights in Texas by suggesting that men ought to be compelled to provide financial support to their sexual partners if they became pregnant. Ioffe tweeted, apparently expecting conservatives to be outraged by this extremely conservative proposal: ÔIf you are anti-choice and you want to make sure women carry every pregnancy to term, why not make the person who created the pregnancy contribute? Why not have men pay child support to the women they impregnate?Õ50 
Why not indeed? In fact IÕd say that itÕs quite possible to be pro-choice and to insist that men ought to take responsibility for the children they help to create. We used to have a social institution established for exactly that purpose. We still could. 
I have just one piece of advice to offer in this chapter, and youÕve probably already guessed what it will be. So, here it is: get married. And do your best to stay married. Particularly if you have children, and particularly if those children are still young. And if you do find yourself in the position of being a single mother, wait until your children are older before you bring a stepfather into their home. These directives are harder to follow now than they used to be, because we no longer live in a culture that incentivises perseverance in marriage. But it is still possible for individuals to go against the grain and insist on doing the harder, less fashionable thing. 
The critics of marriage are right to say that it has historically been used as a vehicle for the control of women by men, and theyÕre right to point out that most marriages do not live up to a romantic ideal. TheyÕre right, too, that monogamous, lifelong marriage is in a sense ÔunnaturalÕ in that it is not the human norm. The marriage system that prevailed in the West up until recently was not perfect, nor was it easy for most people to conform to, since it demanded high levels of tolerance and self-control. Where the critics go wrong is in arguing that there is any better system. There isnÕt. 

Notes 
1. 

Aidan Lyon, ÔWhy are normal distributions normal?Õ, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 65 (2014): 621Ð49. 

2. 

H. J. Eysenck and James A. Wakefield, ÔPsychological factors as predictors of marital satisfactionÕ, Advances in Behaviour Research and Therapy 3 (1981): 151Ð92. 

3. 

Jane Galt [Megan McArdle], ÔA really, really, really long post about gay marriage that does not, in the end, support one side or the otherÕ, 2 April 2005, 


https://web.archive.org/web/20050406215537/http://www.jane 
galt.net/blog/archives/005244.html. 
4. 

Hansard, House of Lords debates, vol. 303, col. 297, 30 June 1969. 

5. 

Gavin Thompson et al., Olympic Britain: Social and Economic Change since the 1908 and 1948 London Games. London: House of Commons Library, 2011. 

6. 

Chiara Giordano, ÔUK heterosexual marriage rate falls to lowest on recordÕ, 
14 
April 
2020, 
www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home.


news/marriage-rate-uk-latest-figures-lowest-record-ons.
a9464706.html. 


7. 

Births in England and Wales: summary tables, Office for National Statistics, Release date: 22 July 2020. 

8. 

Thompson et al., Olympic Britain. 

9. 

Dan Hurley, 19 April 2005, www.nytimes.com/2005/04/19/health/divorce-rate-its-not-as.
high-as-you-think.html. 


10. 

W. Bradford Wilcox and Wendy Wang, 25 September 2017, https://ifstudies.org/blog/the-marriage-divide-how-and-why.
working-class-families-are-more-fragile-today. 


11. 

Susan B. Sorenson and Devan Spear, ÔNew data on intimate partner violence and intimate relationships: implications for gun laws and federal data collectionÕ, Preventive Medicine 107 (2018): 103Ð8. 

12. 

Paul Amato and Alan Booth, A Generation at Risk: Growing Up in an Era of Family Upheaval. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997, p. 220. 




13. 
Paula Span, ÔThe gray gender gap: older women are likelier to go it aloneÕ, 11 October 2016, www.nytimes.com/2016/10/11/health/marital-status-elderly.
health.html; 
Kyrsty 
Hazell, 
31 
January 
2012, 
www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/01/31/divorced-men-are-twice.
as-likely-to-remarry_n_1243472.html. 

14. 

Sonia 
Frontera, 
4 
August 
2021, 
www.divorcemag.com/blog/if.
you-divorce-now-will-you-regret-your-divorce-later. 


15. 

Betsey Stevenson, ÔThe impact of divorce laws on marriagespecific capitalÕ, Journal of Labor Economics 25 (2007): 75Ð94. 

16. 

Nicola Davis and Niamh McIntyre, 7 March 2019, www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2019/mar/07/revealed-pill-still.
most-popular-prescribed-contraceptive-in-england; 
Kimberly 
Daniels and Joyce C. Abma, ÔCurrent contraception status among women aged 15Ð49Õ, December 2018, www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs/db327.htm. 


17. 

ÔHow effective is contraception at preventing pregnancy?Õ, 17 April 
2020, 
www.nhs.uk/conditions/contraception/how-effective.
contraception/. 



18. 
See 
www.guttmacher.org/news-release/2018/about-half-us.
abortion-patients-report-using-contraception-month-they.
became. 

19. 

Virginia Ironside, 18 January 2011, www.dailymail.co.uk/home/you/article-1346813/The-flip-1960s.
sexual-revolution-We-paid-price-free-love.html. 


20. 

Nikola Komlenac, Manuel Pittl, Susanne Perkhofer et al., ÔLinks between virginity beliefs, negative feelings after virginity loss and sexual performance anxiety in a sample of German-speaking heterosexual-identified women and menÕ, Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy 48 (2022): 1Ð18. 



30. 

Lara Bazelon, ÔDivorce can be an act of radical self-loveÕ, 30 September 2021, www.nytimes.com/2021/09/30/opinion/divorce-children.html. 


31. 

Quoted in Diane Jeske and Richard Fumerton, eds, Readings in Political Philosophy: Theory and Applications. Peterborough, Ont.: Broadview Press, 2011, p. 649. 

32. 

The Hostel for Homeless Young Mums, episode 1, BBC Three, 7 June 2019. 

33. 

Barbara A. Crow, Radical Feminism: A Documentary Reader. New York: New York University Press, 2000, p. 76. 

34. 

Amy Westervelt, 26 May 2018, www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/may/26/is.
motherhood-the-unfinished-work-of-feminism. 


35. 

Mary Ann Mason, ÔIn the ivory tower, men onlyÕ, 17 June 2013, https://slate.com/human-interest/2013/06/female-academics.
pay-a-heavy-baby-penalty.html. 


36. 

Leah Libresco Sargeant, 7 December 2020, www.plough.com/en/topics/justice/culture-of-life/dependence. 


37. 

Susan Faludi, 8 April 2013, www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/04/15/death-of-a.
revolutionary. 


38. 

As You Like It, Act II, scene VII. 

39. 

Germaine Greer, The Female Eunuch. London: Harper Perennial, [1970] 2006, pp. 264Ð6. 

40. 

Nicholas A. Christakis, Blueprint: The Evolutionary Origins of a Good Society. New York: Little, Brown, 2019, p. 74. 

41. 

Patrick Lee, Robert P. George and Gerard V. Bradley, ÔMarriage and procreationÕ, 28 March 2011, www.thepublicdiscourse.com/2011/03/2638/. 


42. 

Eli J. Finkel, The All-or-Nothing Marriage: How the Best Marriages Work. New York: Dutton, 2017. 

43. 

John Corvino and Maggie Gallagher, Debating Same-Sex Marriage. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012. 

44. 

Mary Harrington, 21 October 2020, https://unherd.com/2020/10/feminists-shouldnt-have-sex.
before-marriage/. 


45. 

Erika Bachiochi, The Rights of Women: Reclaiming a Lost Vision. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2021, p. 16. 

46. 

D. R. White, L. Betzig, M. B. Mulder et al., ÔRethinking polygyny: co-wives, codes, and cultural systemsÕ (and comments and reply), Current Anthropology 29 (1988): 529Ð72; www.jstor.org/stable/2743506. 


47. 

Joseph Henrich, Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson, ÔThe puzzle of monogamous marriageÕ, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 367 (2012): 657Ð69. 

48. 

Lee Gettler, Thomas McDade, Alan Feranil and Christopher Kuzawa, ÔLongitudinal evidence that fatherhood decreases testosterone in human malesÕ, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 108 (2011): 16194Ð9. 

49. 

Jennifer Savin, ÔWould you sign a sexual consent form?Õ, 13 March 
2020, 
www.cosmopolitan.com/uk/love.
sex/sex/a31042298/sexual-consent-forms/. 





50. 
See https://twitter.com/juliaioffe/status/1446113958650253313. 


Conclusion: Listen to Your Mother 
IÕm treading a fine line in this book. On the one hand, IÕm arguing against a naive kind of Ôchoice feminismÕ that fails to acknowledge the subtle and not so subtle incentive structures that influence individual decision making. On the other hand, IÕm trying to encourage readers to make particular choices, fully in the knowledge that your agency is heavily constrained. In other words, IÕm telling you that your options are limited but that you do still have them. ÔThere are ways out,Õ as the poet Charles Bukowski puts it, Ôthere is light somewhere, it may not be much light, but it beats the darkness.Õ 
So IÕve tried to offer chinks of light. Because I truly believe not only that there is scope for individuals to behave differently, but also that these individual actions can scale to something more significant. Things can change very quickly when people realise that there are others who secretly feel the same way as they do. 
My friend the writer Katherine Dee has been predicting a change for some time. ÔI believe the pendulum with sexuality is going to swing, big time,Õ she wrote last year. ÔWeÕre diving headlong into something thatÕs been simmering in the background since 2013Ð2014 É The pot is about to boil over.Õ Katherine is one of those people who has a talent for noticing changes in the cultural winds, and she observes more and more signs of a coming reaction against the excesses of the sexual liberation narrative, particularly from Gen Z women who have 
experienced the worst of it.1 
I think Katherine is right on this. And while I wrote this book in the hope that it would be read by men and women of all ages, my dearest wish is that it will be read by young women in particular Ð the group who have been utterly failed by liberal feminism and who have the most to gain from a swing back against its excesses. 
So while there is advice within these pages that could be helpful to any reader, it is worth repeating here the points that are most relevant to these particular young women. This is the same advice I would offer my own daughter: 

Distrust 
any person or ideology that puts pressure on you to ignore your moral intuition. 


Chivalry 
is actually a good thing. We all have to control our sexual desires, and men particularly so, given their greater physical strength and average higher sex drives. 


Sometimes 
(though not always) you can readily spot sexually aggressive men. There are a handful of personality traits that are common to them: impulsivity, promiscuity, hyper-masculinity and disagreeableness. These traits in combination should put you on your guard. 


A 
man who is aroused by violence is a man to steer well clear of, whether or not he uses the vocabulary of BDSM to excuse his behaviour. If he can maintain an erection while beating a woman, he isnÕt safe to be alone with. 


Consent 
workshops are mostly useless. The best way of reducing the incidence of rape is by reducing the opportunities for would-be rapists to offend. This can be done either by keeping convicted rapists in prison or by limiting their access to potential victims. 


The 
category of people most likely to become victims of these men are young women aged about thirteen to twenty-five. All girls and women, but particularly those in this age category, should avoid being alone with men they donÕt know or men who give them the creeps. Gut instinct is not to be ignored: itÕs usually triggered by a red flag thatÕs well worth noticing. 


Get 
drunk or high in private and with female friends rather than in public or in mixed company. 



DonÕt use dating apps. Mutual friends can vet histories and punish bad behaviour. Dating apps canÕt. 

Holding 
off on having sex with a new boyfriend for at least a few months is a good way of discovering whether or not heÕs serious about you or just looking for a hook-up. 


Only 
have sex with a man if you think he would make a good father to your children Ð not because you necessarily intend to have children with him, but because this is a good rule of thumb in deciding whether or not heÕs worthy of your trust. 


Monogamous 
marriage is by far the most stable and reliable foundation on which to build a family. 


I wrote in the first chapter that none of my advice would be ground.breaking, and I stand by that. This is all informed by peer-reviewed research, but it shouldnÕt have to be, since this is pretty much what most mothers would tell their daughters, if only they were willing to listen. 
If we are to challenge the social costs of the sexual revolution effectively, then we canÕt redesign society on the back of an envelope. We have to look at social structures that have already proven to be successful in the past and compare them against one another, rather than against some imagined alternative that has never existed and is never likely to exist. The technology shock of the Pill led sexual liberals to the hubristic assumption that our society could be uniquely free from the oppression of sexual norms and could function just fine. The last sixty years have proved that assumption to be wrong. We need to re-erect the social guard rails that have been torn down. And, in order to do that, we have to start by stating the obvious. Sex must be taken seriously. Men and women are different. Some desires are bad. Consent is not enough. Violence is not love. Loveless sex is not empowering. People are not products. Marriage is good. 
And, above all, listen to your mother. In 2021, a TikTok video by a young American woman called Abby went viral online. In the video, Abby tells the camera: I, like many other college students, am someone who is 
entangled in hook-up culture, and often hook-up culture makes 
it difficult for me to determine whether or not what IÕm doing is 
good for me and kind to myself. Very often as women we are led 
astray from what we actually deserve. So hereÕs what IÕve been 
doing lately É 
She pulls up on screen a series of childhood photos of herself and explains that the men sheÕs hooked up with in the past have often made her feel as though sheÕs undeserving, not only of love but also of basic respect. So sheÕs trying to remind herself of her worth as a person by playing the role of mother to her inner child. ÔAm I OK with that for her?Õ, she asks tearfully, gesturing at her younger self in the photo. ÔWould I let her be a late-night, drunk second option? Would I let this happen to her?Õ She shakes her head, weeping: ÔFrom a third person, caretaker point of view, I would never let any of this stuff happen to her.Õ2 

Abby is trying to mother herself, though she isnÕt quite sure how to do it. And the thousands of young women in her replies are trying to do the same (ÔIÕm sobbingÕ; Ôi rlly needed this, thank youÕ; Ôthis just changed my lifeÕ). TheyÕve been denied the guidance of mothers, not because their actual mothers are unwilling to offer it but because of a matricidal impulse in liberal feminism that cuts young women off from the ÔproblematicÕ older generation. This means not only that they are cut off from the voices of experience, but Ð more importantly Ð they are also cut off from the person who loves them most in the world. Feminism needs to rediscover the mother, in every sense. 
Until we do, each individual woman will have to learn on her own the lie of the promise of sexual liberation Ð the lie that tells us, as Andrea Dworkin phrased it, that Ôfucking per se is freedom per se.Õ It was a lie all along. ItÕs time, at last, to say so. 
Notes 
1. 
See 
https://defaultfriend.substack.com/p/72-the-coming-wave-of.
sex-negativity/comments. 

2. 
www.tiktok.com/@boopyshmurda/video/7005669146797100294 
? 
_d=secCgwIARCbDRjEFSACKAESPgo8A3%2F3%2BVqr99yp38C 
jHMwIHZRovbGpN%2F1Ofceit60%2FbrIkip5j1wjtLbaWkNvIMM 
Yfq7cfVOfZYKXnj8OFGgA%3D&checksum=efde3365a11e444642 
5e803bb2365a4bc7da8adc77b611ca58eea8c386503010&language 
=en&preview_pb=0&sec_user_id=MS4wLjABAAAAF6zaqMYfQn 
KJ0VNVgzQZ_iQZLpCAwXeTp-B4vxjUUhmGv.
0l5ymJtF7GB2x7PqDr&share_app_id=1233&share_item_id=70 
05669146797100294&share_link_id=F9BB5F9F-0B51-4FC9.
8E3A.
465856C0AF34&source=h5_m&timestamp=1639260264&tt_fro 
m=copy&u_code=djbm55jfm1c18g&user_id=6980252324338697 
221&utm_campaign=client_share&utm_medium=ios&utm_sour 
ce=copy&_r=1. 






POLITY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT 
Go to www.politybooks.com/eula 
to access PolityÕs ebook EULA. 



First published in July 2021.

New Enterprise HouseSt Helens Street DerbyDE1 3GY UK 
email: gareth.icke@davidicke.com
Copyright © 2021 David Icke
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission from thePublisher, except for the quotation of brief passages in criticism
Cover Design: Gareth IckeBook Design: Neil Hague
British Library Cataloguing-inPublication Data 
A catalogue record for this book isavailable from the British Library
eISBN 978-18384153-1-0

Dedication: 
To Freeeeeedom! 


Renegade: 
AdjectiveÔHaving rejected tradition: Unconventional.Õ
Merriam-Webster Dictionary 

Acquiescence to tyranny is the death of the spirit 
You may be 38 years old, as I happen to be. And one day,some great opportunity stands before you and calls you tostand up for some great principle, some great issue, somegreat cause. And you refuse to do it because you are afraidÉ You refuse to do it because you want to live longer ÉYouÕre afraid that you will lose your job, or you are afraidthat you will be criticised or that you will lose yourpopularity, or youÕre afraid that somebody will stab you, orshoot at you or bomb your house; so you refuse to take thestand.
Well, you may go on and live until you are 90, but youÕre justas dead at 38 as you would be at 90. And the cessation ofbreathing in your life is but the belated announcement of anearlier death of the spirit.
Martin Luther King 

How the few control the many and always have Ð the many do whatever theyÕre told 
ÔForward, the Light Brigade!ÕWas there a man dismayed?Not though the soldier knewSomeone had blundered.Theirs not to make reply,Theirs not to reason why,Theirs but to do and die.Into the valley of DeathRode the six hundred.
Cannon to right of them,Cannon to leCannon in front of themVolleyed and thundered;Stormed at with shot and shell,Boldly they rode and well,Into the jaws of Death,Into the mouth of hellRode the six hundred
Alfred Lord Tennyson (1809-1892) 
The mist is liI can see the way aheadAnd IÕve leThat once inspired my lifeAnd the strength of the emotionIs like thunder in the airÕCos the promise that we made each otherHaunts me to the end
The secret of your beautyAnd the mystery of your soulIÕve been searching for in everyone I meetAnd the times IÕve been mistakenItÕs impossible to sayAnd the grass is growingUnderneath our feet
The words that I rememberFrom my childhood still are trueThat thereÕs none so blindAs those who will not seeAnd to those who lack the courageAnd say itÕs dangerous to tryWell they just donÕt knowThat love eternal will not be denied
I know youÕre out there somewhereSomewhere, somewhereI know youÕre out there somewhere
Somewhere you can hear my voiceI know IÕll Þnd you somehowSomehow, somehowI know IÕll Þnd you somehowAnd somehow IÕll return again to you
The Moody Blues 

Are you a gutless wonder -or a Renegade Mind? 
Monuments put from pen to paper,Turns me into a gutless wonder,And if you tolerate this,Then your children will be next.Gravity keeps my head down,Or is it maybe shame ...
Manic Street Preachers 
Rise like lions aIn unvanquishable number.Shake your chains to earth like dewWhich in sleep have fallen on you.Ye are many Ð they are few.
Percy Shelley 
CHAPTER 
1 
CHAPTER 
2 
CHAPTER 
3 
CHAPTER 
4 
CHAPTER 
5 
CHAPTER 
6 
CHAPTER 
7 
CHAPTER 
8 
CHAPTER 
9 
CHAPTER 
10 
CHAPTER 
11 
CHAPTER 
12 
Postscript 
APPENDIX 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX 
Contents 
ÔIÕm 
thinkingÕ 
Ð 
Oh, 
but 
are 
you? 
Renegade 
perception 
The 
Pushbacker 
sting 
ÔCovidÕ: 
The 
calculated 
catastrophe 
There 
is 
no 
ÔvirusÕ 
Sequence 
of 
deceit 
War 
on 
your 
mind 
ÔReframingÕ 
insanity 
We 
must 
have 
it? 
So 
what 
is 
it? 
Human 
2.0 
Who 
controls 
the 
Cult? 
Escaping 
Wetiko 
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell 
Statement 
on 
Virus 
Isolation 
CHAPTER ONE 
IÕm thinkingÕ Ð Oh, but are you? 
Think for yourself and let others enjoy the privilege of doing so too 
Voltaire 
French-born philosopher, mathematician and scientist RenŽDescartes became famous for his statement in Latin in the 17thcentury which translates into English as: ÔI think, therefore I am.Õ
On the face of it that is true. Thought reßects perception andperception leads to both behaviour and self-identity. In that senseÔweÕ are what we think. But who or what is doing the thinking and isthinking the only route to perception? Clearly, as we shall see, ÔweÕare not always the source of ÔourÕ perception, indeed with regard tohumanity as a whole this is rarely the case; and thinking is far fromthe only means of perception. Thought is the village idiot comparedwith other expressions of consciousness that we all have thepotential to access and tap into. This has to be true when we are those other expressions of consciousness which are inÞnite in nature.We have forgo, more to the point, been manipulated toforget.
These are not just the esoteric musings of the navel. The wholefoundation of human control and oppression is control ofperception. Once perception is h.acked then so is behaviour whichis dictated by perception. Collective perception becomes collectivebehaviour and collective behaviour is what we call human society.Perception is all and those behind human control know that which iswhy perception is the target 24/7 of the psychopathic manipulatorsthat I call the Global Cult. They know that if they dictate perceptionthey will dictate behaviour and collectively dictate the nature ofhuman society. They are further aware that perception is formedfrom information received and if they control the circulation ofinformation they will to a vast extent direct human behaviour.Censorship of information and opinion has become globally Nazi-like in recent years and never more blatantly than since the illusoryÔvirus pandemicÕ was triggered out of China in 2019 and across theworld in 2020. Why have billions submiaccepted fascistic societies in a way they would have never believedpossible? Those controlling the information spewing fromgovernment, mainstream media and Silicon Valley (all controlled bythe same Global Cult networks) told them they were in danger froma Ôdeadly virusÕ and only by submiconceding their most basic of freedoms could they and their familiesbe protected. This monumental and provable lie became theperception of the billions and therefore the behaviour of the billions. Inthose few words you have the whole structure and modus operandiof human control. Fear is a perception Ð False Emotion AppearingReal Ð and fear is the currency of control. In short É get them by theballs (or give them the impression that you have) and their heartsand minds will follow. Nothing grips the dangly bits and freezes therear-end more comprehensively than fear.
World number 1 
There are two ÔworldsÕ in what appears to be one ÔworldÕ and theprime di.erence between them is knowledge. First we have the massof human society in which the population is maintained in coldly-calculated ignorance through control of information and theÔeducationÕ (indoctrination) system. ThatÕs all you really need tocontrol to enslave billions in a perceptual delusion in which what areperceived to be their thoughts and opinions are ever-repeatedmantras that the system has been downloading all their livesthrough ÔeducationÕ, media, science, medicine, politics and academiain which the personnel and advocates are themselvesoverwhelmingly the perceptual products of the same repetition.Teachers and academics in general are processed by the sameprogramming machine as everyone else, but unlike the greatmajority they never leave the ÔeducationÕ program. It gripped themas students and continues to grip them as programmers ofsubsequent generations of students. The programmed become theprogrammers Ð the programmed programmers. The same canlargely be said for scientists, doctors and politicians and not leastbecause as the American writer Upton Sinclair said: ÔIt is di.cult toget a man to understand something when his salary depends uponhis not understanding it.Õ If your career and income depend onthinking the way the system demands then you will Ð bar a few free-minded exceptions Ð concede your mind to the PerceptualMainframe that I call the Postage Stamp Consensus. This is a tinyband of perceived knowledge and possibility ÔtaughtÕ (downloaded)in the schools and universities, pounded out by the mainstreammedia and on which all government policy is founded. Try thinking,and especially speaking and acting, outside of the ÔboxÕ of consensusand see what that does for your career in the Mainstream Everythingwhich bullies, harasses, intimidates and ridicules the population intocompliance. Here we have the simple structure which enslaves mostof humanity in a perceptual prison cell for an entire lifetime and IÕllgo deeper into this process shortly. Most of what humanity is taughtas fact is nothing more than programmed belief. American scienceÞction author Frank Herbert was right when he said: ÔBelief can bemanipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous.Õ In the ÔCovidÕ agebelief is promoted and knowledge is censored. It was always so, butnever to the extreme of today.
World number 2 
A Ônumber 2Õ is slang for Ôdoing a pooÕ and how appropriate that iswhen this other ÔworldÕ is doing just that on humanity every minuteof every day. World number 2 is a global network of secret societiesand semi-secret groups dictating the direction of society viagovernments, corporations and authorities of every kind. I havespent more than 30 years uncovering and exposing this network thatI call the Global Cult and knowing its agenda is what has made mybooks so accurate in predicting current and past events. Secretsocieties are secret for a reason. They want to keep their hoardedknowledge to themselves and their chosen initiates and to hide itfrom the population which they seek through ignorance to controland subdue. The whole foundation of the division between World 1and World 2 is knowledge. What number 1 knows number 2 must not.Knowledge they have worked so hard to keep secret includes (a) theagenda to enslave humanity in a centrally-controlled globaldictatorship, and (b) the nature of reality and life itself. The lamust be suppressed to allow the former (a) to prevail as I shall beexplaining. The way the Cult manipulates and interacts with thepopulation can be likened to a spiderÕs web. The ÔspiderÕ sits at thecentre in the shadows and imposes its will through the web witheach strand represented in World number 2 by a secret society,satanic or semi-secret group, and in World number 1 Ð the world ofthe seen Ð by governments, agencies of government, lawenforcement, corporations, the banking system, mediaconglomerates and Silicon Valley (Fig 1 overleaf). The spider and theweb connect and coordinate all these organisations to pursue thesame global outcome while the population sees them as individualentities working randomly and independently. At the level of theweb governments are the banking system are the corporations are themedia are Silicon Valley are the World Health Organization workingfrom their inner cores as one unit. Apparently unconnectedcountries, corporations, institutions, organisations and people are onthe same team pursuing the same global outcome. Strands in the webimmediately around the spider are the most secretive and exclusivesecret societies and their membership is emphatically restricted tothe Cult inner-circle emerging through the generations fromparticular bloodlines for reasons I will come to. At the core of thecore you would get them in a single room. ThatÕs how many peopleare dictating the direction of human society and its transformationthrough the ÔCovidÕ hoax and other means. As the web expands outfrom the spider we meet the secret societies that many people will beaware of Ð the Freemasons, Knights Templar, Knights of Malta, OpusDei, the inner sanctum of the Jesuit Order, and such like. Note howmany are connected to the Church of Rome and there is a reason forthat. The Roman Church was established as a revamp, a rebranding,of the relocated ÔChurchÕ of Babylon and the Cult imposing globaltyranny today can be tracked back to Babylon and Sumer in what isnow Iraq.

Figure 1: The global web through which the few control the many. (Image Neil Hague.) 
Inner levels of the web operate in the unseen away from the publiceye and then we have what I call the cusp organisations located atthe point where the hidden meets the seen. They include a series ofsatellite organisations answering to a secret society founded inLondon in the late 19th century called the Round Table and amongthem are the Royal Institute of International A.airs (UK, founded in1920); Council on Foreign Relations (US, 1921); Bilderberg Group(worldwide, 1954); Trilateral Commission (US/worldwide, 1972); andthe Club of Rome (worldwide, 1968) which was created to exploitenvironmental concerns to justify the centralisation of global powerto Ôsave the planetÕ. The Club of Rome instigated with others thehuman-caused climate change hoax which has led to all the Ôgreennew dealsÕ demanding that very centralisation of control. Cusporganisations, which include endless Ôthink tanksÕ all over the world,are designed to coordinate a single global policy between politicaland business leaders, intelligence personnel, media organisationsand anyone who can inßuence the direction of policy in their ownsphere of operation. Major players and regular awhat is happening Ð or some of it Ð while others come and go andare kept overwhelmingly in the dark about the big picture. I refer tothese cusp groupings as semi-secret in that they can be publiclyidentiÞed, but what goes on at the inner-core is kept very much ÔinhouseÕ even from most of their members and participants through aÞercely-imposed system of compartmentalisation. Only let themknow what they need to know to serve your interests and no more.The structure of secret societies serves as a perfect example of thisprinciple. Most Freemasons never get higher than the bolevels of ÔdegreeÕ (degree of knowledge) when there are 33 o.cialdegrees of the ScoÔcompartmentÕ or degree if those at that level choose to allow them.Knowledge can be carefully assigned only to those considered ÔsafeÕ.I went to my local FreemasonÕs lodge a few years ago when theywere having an Ôopen dayÕ to show how cuddly they were and whenI chaas astonished at how liÞle knew even about the most ubiquitous symbols they use. Themushroom technique Ð keep them in the dark and feed them bullshit
Ð applies to most people in the web as well as the population as awhole. Sub-divisions of the web mirror in theme and structuretransnational corporations which have a headquarters somewhere inthe world dictating to all their subsidiaries in di.erent countries.Subsidiaries operate in their methodology and branding to the samecentrally-dictated plan and policy in pursuit of particular ends. TheCult web functions in the same way. Each country has its own webas a subsidiary of the global one. They consist of networks of secretsocieties, semi-secret groups and bloodline families and their job isto impose the will of the spider and the global web in their particularcountry. Subsidiary networks control and manipulate the nationalpolitical system, Þnance, corporations, media, medicine, etc. toensure that they follow the globally-dictated Cult agenda. Thesenetworks were the means through which the ÔCovidÕ hoax could beplayed out with almost every country responding in the same way.
The ÔYessirÕ pyramid 
Compartmentalisation is the key to understanding how a tiny fewcan dictate the lives of billions when combined with a top-downsequence of imposition and acquiescence. The inner core of the Cultsits at the peak of the pyramidal hierarchy of human society (Fig 2overleaf). It imposes its will Ð its agenda for the world Ð on the levelimmediately below which acquiesces to that imposition. This levelthen imposes the Cult will on the level below them which acquiescesand imposes on the next level. Very quickly we meet levels in thehierarchy that have no idea there even is a Cult, but the sequence ofimposition and acquiescence continues down the pyramid in just thesame way. ÔI donÕt know why we are doing this but the order camefrom Òon-highÓ and so we beennysonsaid of the cannon fodder levels in his poem The Charge of the Light Brigade: ÔTheirs not to reason why; theirs but to do and die.Õ The nextline says that Ôinto the valley of death rode the six hundredÕ and theydied because they obeyed without question what their perceivedÔsuperiorsÕ told them to do. In the same way the populationcapitulated to ÔCovidÕ. The whole hierarchical pyramid functionslike this to allow the very few to direct the enormous many.Eventually imposition-acquiescence-imposition-acquiescence comesdown to the mass of the population at the foot of the pyramid. Ifthey acquiesce to those levels of the hierarchy imposing on them(governments/law enforcement/doctors/media) a circuit iscompleted between the population and the handful of super-psychopaths in the Cult inner core at the top of the pyramid.Without a circuit-breaking refusal to obey, the sequence ofimposition and acquiescence allows a staggeringly few people toimpose their will upon the entirety of humankind. We are looking atthe very sequence that has subjugated billions since the start of 2020.Our freedom has not been taken from us. Humanity has given itaway. Fascists do not impose fascism because there are not enoughof them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing tofascism. Put another way allowing their perceptions to beprogrammed to the extent that leads to the population giving theirfreedom away by giving their perceptions Ð their mind Ð away. If thiscircuit is not broken by humanity ceasing to cooperate with theirown enslavement then nothing can change. For that to happenpeople have to critically think and see through the lies and windowdressing and then summon the backbone to act upon what they see.The Cult spends its days working to stop either happening and itsmethodology is systematic and highly detailed, but it can beovercome and that is what this book is all about.

Figure 2: The simple sequence of imposition and compliance that allows a handful of people at the peak of the pyramid to dictate the lives of billions. 
The Life Program 
Okay, back to world number 1 or the world of the ÔmassesÕ. Observethe process of what we call ÔlifeÕ and it is a perceptual downloadfrom cradle to grave. The Cult has created a global structure inwhich perception can be programmed and the program continuallytopped-up with what appears to be constant conÞrmation that theprogram is indeed true reality. The important word here is ÔappearsÕ.
This is the structure, the ßy-trap, the Postage Stamp Consensus orPerceptual Mainframe, which represents that incredibly narrowband of perceived possibility delivered by the ÔeducationÕ system,mainstream media, science and medicine. From the earliest age thedownload begins with parents who have themselves succumbed tothe very programming their children are about to go through. Mostparents donÕt do this out of malevolence and mostly it is quite theopposite. They do what they believe is best for their children andthat is what the program has told them is best. Within three or fouryears comes the major transition from parental programming to full-blown state (Cult) programming in school, college and universitywhere perceptually-programmed teachers and academics pass ontheir programming to the next generations. Teachers who resist aresoon marginalised and their careers ended while children who resistare called a problem child for whom Ritalin may need to beprescribed. A few years aer entering the ÔworldÕ children are underthe control of authority Þgures representing the state telling themwhen they have to be there, when they can leave and when they canspeak, eat, even go to the toilet. This is calculated preparation for alifetime of obeying authority in all its forms. Reßex-action fear ofauthority is instilled by authority from the start. Children soon learnthe carrot and stick consequences of obeying or defying authoritywhich is underpinned daily for the rest of their life. Fortunately Idaydreamed through this crap and never obeyed authority simplybecause it told me to. This approach to my alleged Ôbeto this day. There can be consequences of pursuing open-mindedfreedom in a world of closed-minded conformity. I spent a lot of timein school corridors aer being ejected from the classroom for nottaking some of it seriously and now I spend a lot of time beingejected from Facebook, YouTube and Twi. But I can tell you thatbeing true to yourself and not compromising your self-respect is farmore exhilarating than bowing to authority for authorityÕs sake. YoudonÕt have to be a sheep to the shepherd (authority) and the sheepdog (fear of not obeying authority).
The perceptual download continues throughout the formativeyears in school, college and university while script-readingÔteachersÕ, ÔacademicsÕ ÔscientistsÕ, ÔdoctorsÕ and ÔjournalistsÕ insistthat ongoing generations must be as programmed as they are.Accept the program or you will not pass your ÔexamsÕ which conÞrmyour ÔdegreeÕ of programming. It is tragic to think that many parentspressure their o.spring to work hard at school to download theprogram and qualify for the next stage at college and university. Thelate, great, American comedian George Carlin said: ÔHereÕs a bumpersticker IÕd like to see: We are proud parents of a child who hasresisted his teachersÕ awill of his corporate masters.Õ Well, the best of luck Þnding many ofthose, George. Then comes the moment to leave the formalprogramming years in academia and enter the ÔadultÕ world of work.There you meet others in your chosen or prescribed arena who wentthrough the same Postage Stamp Consensus program before youdid. There is therefore overwhelming agreement between almosteveryone on the basic foundations of Postage Stamp reality and therejection, even contempt, of the few who have a mind of their ownand are prepared to use it. This has two major e.ects. Firstly, theconsensus conÞrms to the programmed that their download is reallyhow things are. I mean, everyone knows that, right? Secondly, thearrogance and ignorance of Postage Stamp adherents ensure thatanyone questioning the program will have unpleasant consequencesfor seeking their own truth and not picking their perceptions fromthe shelf marked: ÔThings you must believe without question and ifyou donÕt youÕre a dangerous lunatic conspiracy theorist and aharebrained nuÕ.
Every government, agency and corporation is founded on thesame Postage Stamp prison cell and you can see why so manypeople believe the same thing while calling it their own ÔopinionÕ.Fusion of governments and corporations in pursuit of the sameagenda was the deÞnition of fascism described by Italian dictatorBenito Mussolini. The pressure to conform to perceptual normsdownloaded for a lifetime is incessant and inÞltrates society rightdown to family groups that become censors and condemners of theirown Ôblack sheepÕ for not, ironically, being sheep. We have seen anexplosion of that in the ÔCovidÕ era. Cult-owned global mediaunleashes its propaganda all day every day in support of the PostageStamp and targets with abuse and ridicule anyone in the public eyewho wonÕt bend their mind to the will of the tyranny. Any responseto this is denied (certainly in my case). They donÕt want to give aplatform to expose o.cial lies. Cult-owned-and-created Internetgiants like Facebook, Google, YouTube and Twiou forhaving an unapproved opinion. Facebook boasts that its AI censorsdelete 97-percent of Ôhate speechÕ before anyone even reports it.Much of that Ôhate speechÕ will simply be an opinion that Facebookand its masters donÕt want people to see. Such perceptual oppressionis widely known as fascism. Even Facebook executive BennyThomas, a ÔCEO Global Planning LeadÕ, said in comments secretlyrecorded by investigative journalism operation Project Veritas thatFacebook is Ôtoo powerfulÕ and should be broken up:
I mean, no king in history has been the ruler of two billion people, but Mark Zuckerberg is É And heÕs 36. ThatÕs too much for a 36-year-old ... You should not have power over two billion people. I just think thatÕs wrong. 
Thomas said Facebook-owned platforms like Instagram, Oculus, andWhatsApp needed to be separate companies. ÔItÕs too much powerwhen theyÕre all one togetherÕ. ThatÕs the way the Cult likes it,however. We have an executive of a Cult organisation in BennyThomas that doesnÕt know there is a Cult such is thecompartmentalisation. Thomas said that Facebook and Google Ôareno longer companies, theyÕre countriesÕ. Actually they are morepowerful than countries on the basis that if you control informationyou control perception and control human society.
I love my oppressor 
Another expression of this psychological trickery is for those whorealise they are being pressured into compliance to eventuallyconvince themselves to believe the o.cial narratives to protect theirself-respect from accepting the truth that they have succumbed tomeek and subservient compliance. Such people become some of themost vehement defenders of the system. You can see themeverywhere screaming abuse at those who prefer to think forthemselves and by doing so reminding the compliers of their owncapitulation to conformity. ÔYou are talking dangerous nonsense youCovidiot!!Õ Are you trying to convince me or yourself? It is a potentform of Stockholm syndrome which is deÞned as: ÔA psychologicalcondition that occurs when a victim of abuse identiÞes and aor bonds, positively with their abuser.Õ An example is hostagesbonding and even Ôfalling in loveÕ with their kidnappers. Thesyndrome has been observed in domestic violence, abused children,concentration camp inmates, prisoners of war and many and variousSatanic cults. These are some traits of Stockholm syndrome listed atgoodtherapy.org:
¥
Positive regard towards perpetrators of abuse or captor [seeÔCovidÕ].

¥
Failure to cooperate with police and other government authoritieswhen it comes to holding perpetrators of abuse or kidnappingaccountable [or in the case of ÔCovidÕ cooperating with the policeto enforce and defend their captorsÕ demands].

¥
Li

¥
Belief in the goodness of the perpetrators or kidnappers [seeÔCovidÕ].

¥
Appeasement of captors. This is a manipulative strategy formaintaining oneÕs safety. As victims get rewarded Ð perhaps withless abuse or even with life itself Ð their appeasing behaviours arereinforced [see ÔCovidÕ].

¥
Learned helplessness. This can be akin to Ôif you canÕt beat Ôem,join ÔemÕ. As the victims fail to escape the abuse or captivity, theymay start giving up and soon realize itÕs just easier for everyone ifthey acquiesce all their power to their captors [see ÔCovidÕ].


Feelings of pity toward the abusers, believing they are actually
¥victims themselves. Because of this, victims may go on a crusade
or mission to ÔsaveÕ [protect] their abuser [see the venom
unleashed on those challenging the o.cial ÔCovidÕ narrative].
¥Unwillingness to learn to detach from their perpetrators and heal.In essence, victims may tend to be less loyal to themselves than totheir abuser [ definitely see ÔCovidÕ].
Ponder on those traits and compare them with the behaviour ofgreat swathes of the global population who have defendedgovernments and authorities which have spent every minutedestroying their lives and livelihoods and those of their children andgrandchildren since early 2020 with fascistic lockdowns, house arrestand employment deletion to ÔprotectÕ them from a Ôdeadly virusÕ thattheir abusersÕ perceptually created to bring about this very outcome.We are looking at mass Stockholm syndrome. All those that agree toconcede their freedom will believe those perceptions are originatingin their own independent ÔmindÕ when in fact by conceding theirreality to Stockholm syndrome they have by deÞnition conceded anyindependence of mind. Listen to the ÔopinionsÕ of the acquiescingmasses in this ÔCovidÕ era and what gushes forth is the repetition ofthe o.cial version of everything delivered unprocessed, unÞlteredand unquestioned. The whole programming dynamic works thisway. I must be free because IÕm told that I am and so I think that Iam.
You can see what I mean with the chapter theme of ÔIÕm thinking ÐOh, but are you?Õ The great majority are not thinking, let alone forthemselves. They are repeating what authority has told them tobelieve which allows them to be controlled. Weaving through thismentality is the fear that the Ôconspiracy theoristsÕ are right and thisagain explains the oen hysterical abuse that ensues when you dareto contest the o.cial narrative of anything. Denial is the mechanismof hiding from yourself what you donÕt want to be true. Tellingpeople what they want to hear is easy, but itÕs an inÞnitely greaterchallenge to tell them what they would rather not be happening.
One is akin to pushing against an open door while the other is metwith vehement resistance no madonÕt want it to be true so IÕll convince myself that itÕs not. Examplesare everywhere from the denial that a partner is cheating despite allthe signs to the reßex-action rejection of any idea that world eventsin which country aer country act in exactly the same way arecentrally coordinated. To accept the launspeakable evil is working to destroy your life and the lives of yourchildren with nothing too horriÞc to achieve that end. Who the heckwants that to be true? But if we donÕt face reality the end is dulyachieved and the consequences are far worse and ongoing thanbreaking through the walls of denial today with the courage to makea stand against tyranny.
Connect the dots Ð but how? 
A crucial aspect of perceptual programming is to portray a world inwhich everything is random and almost nothing is connected toanything else. Randomness cannot be coordinated by its very natureand once you perceive events as random the idea they could beconnected is waved away as the rantings of the tinfoil-hat brigade.You canÕt plan and coordinate random you idiot! No, you canÕt, butyou can hide the coldly-calculated and long-planned behind theillusion of randomness. A foundation manifestation of the RenegadeMind is to scan reality for parandom and turn pixels and dots into pictures. This is the way Iwork and have done so for more than 30 years. You look forsimilarities in people, modus operandi and desired outcomes andslowly, then ever quicker, the picture forms. For instance: Therewould seem to be no connection between the ÔCovid pandemicÕ hoaxand the human-caused global-warming hoax and yet they are masks(appropriately) on the same face seeking the same outcome. Thosepushing the global warming myth through the Club of Rome andother Cult agencies are driving the lies about ÔCovidÕ Ð Bill Gates isan obvious one, but they are endless. Why would the same people beinvolved in both when they are clearly not connected? Oh, but theyare. Common themes with personnel are matched by common goals.The ÔsolutionsÕ to both ÔproblemsÕ are centralisation of global powerto impose the will of the few on the many to ÔsaveÕ humanity fromÔCovidÕ and save the planet from an Ôexistential threatÕ (we needÔzero CovidÕ and Ôzero carbon emissionsÕ). These, in turn, connectwith the ÔdotÕ of globalisation which was coined to describe thecentralisation of global power in every area of life through incessantpolitical and corporate expansion, trading blocks and superstateslike the European Union. If you are the few and you want to controlthe many you have to centralise power and decision-making. Themore you centralise power the more power the few at the centre willhave over the many; and the more that power is centralised the morepower those at the centre have to centralise even quicker. Themomentum of centralisation gets faster and faster which is exactlythe process we have witnessed. In this way the hoaxed ÔpandemicÕand the fakery of human-caused global warming serve the interestsof globalisation and the seizure of global power in the hands of theCult inner-circle which is behind ÔCovidÕ, Ôclimate changeÕ and globalisation. At this point random ÔdotsÕ become a clear andobvious picture or pa
Klaus Schwab, the classic Bond villain who founded the CultÕsGates-funded World Economic Forum, published a book in 2020, The Great Reset, in which he used the ÔproblemÕ of ÔCovidÕ to justify atotal transformation of human society to ÔsaveÕ humanity fromÔclimate changeÕ. Schwab said: ÔThe pandemic represents a rare butnarrow window of opportunity to reßect, reimagine, and reset ourworld.Õ What he didnÕt mention is that the Cult he serves is behindboth hoaxes as I show in my book The Answer. He and the Cult donÕthave to reimagine the world. They know precisely what they wantand thatÕs why they destroyed human society with ÔCovidÕ to Ôbuildback beÕ in their grand design. Their job is not to imagine, but toget humanity to imagine and agree with their plans while believingitÕs all random. It must be pure coincidence that ÔThe Great ResetÕhas long been the CultÕs code name for the global imposition offascism and replaced previous code-names of the ÔNew WorldOrderÕ used by Cult frontmen like Father George Bush and the ÔNewOrder of the AgesÕ which emerged from Freemasonry and mucholder secret societies. New Order of the Ages appears on the reverseof the Great Seal of the United States as ÔNovus ordo seclorumÕunderneath the Cult symbol used since way back of the pyramid andall seeing-eye (Fig 3). The pyramid is the hierarchy of human controlheaded by the illuminated eye that symbolises the force behind theCult which I will expose in later chapters. The term ÔAnnuit CoeptisÕtranslates as ÔHe favours our undertakingÕ. We are told the ÔHeÕ isthe Christian god, but ÔHeÕ is not as I will be explaining.

Figure 3: The all-seeing eye of the Cult ÔgodÕ on the Freemason-designed Great Seal of the United States and also on the dollar bill. 
Having you on 
Two major Cult techniques of perceptual manipulation that relate toall this are what I have called since the 1990s Problem-Reaction-Solution (PRS) and the Totalitarian Tiptoe (TT). They can beuncovered by the inquiring mind with a simple question: WhobeneÞts? The answer usually identiÞes the perpetrators of a givenaction or happening through the concept of Ôhe who most beneÞtsfrom a crime is the one most likely to have commiÔCue bono?Õ Ð Who beneÞts? Ð is widely aorator and statesman Marcus Tullius Cicero. No wonder it goes backso far when the concept has been relevant to human behaviour sincehistory was recorded. Problem-Reaction-Solution is the techniqueused to manipulate us every day by covertly creating a problem (orthe illusion of one) and o.ering the solution to the problem (or theillusion of one). In the Þrst phase you create the problem and blamesomeone or something else for why it has happened. This may relateto a Þnancial collapse, terrorist aar, global warming orpandemic, anything in fact that will allow you to impose theÔsolutionÕ to change society in the way you desire at that time. TheÔproblemÕ doesnÕt have to be real. PRS is manipulation of perceptionand all you need is the population to believe the problem is real.Human-caused global warming and the ÔCovid pandemicÕ only haveto be perceived to be real for the population to accept the ÔsolutionsÕ ofauthority. I refer to this technique as NO-Problem-Reaction-Solution.Billions did not meekly accept house arrest from early 2020 becausethere was a real deadly ÔCovid pandemicÕ but because theyperceived Ð believed Ð that to be the case. The antidote to Problem-Reaction-Solution is to ask who beneÞts from the proposed solution.Invariably it will be anyone who wants to justify more controlthrough deletion of freedom and centralisation of power anddecision-making.
The two world wars were Problem-Reaction-Solutions thattransformed and realigned global society. Both were manipulatedinto being by the Cult as I have detailed in books since the mid.1990s. They dramatically centralised global power, especially WorldWar Two, which led to the United Nations and other global bodiesthanks to the overt and covert manipulations of the Rockefellerfamily and other Cult bloodlines like the Rothschilds. The UN is astalking horse for full-blown world government that I will come toshortly. The land on which the UN building stands in New York wasdonated by the Rockefellers and the same Cult family was behindBig Pharma scalpel and drug ÔmedicineÕ and the creation of theWorld Health Organization as part of the UN. They have beenstalwarts of the eugenics movement and funded HitlerÕs race-purityexpertÕ Ernst Rudin. The human-caused global warming hoax hasbeen orchestrated by the Club of Rome through the UN which ismanufacturing both the ÔproblemÕ through its IntergovernmentalPanel on Climate Change and imposing the ÔsolutionÕ through itsAgenda 21 and Agenda 2030 which demand the total centralisationof global power to Ôsave the worldÕ from a climate hoax the UnitedNations is itself perpetrating. What a small world the Cult can beseen to be particularly among the inner circles. The bedfellow ofProblem-Reaction-Solution is the Totalitarian Tiptoe which becamethe Totalitarian Sprint in 2020. The technique is fashioned to hide thecarefully-coordinated behind the cover of apparently random events.You start the sequence at ÔAÕ and you know you are heading for ÔZÕ.You donÕt want people to know that and each step on the journey ispresented as a random happening while all the steps strung togetherlead in the same direction. The speed may have quickeneddramatically in recent times, but you can still see the incrementalapproach of the Tiptoe in the case of ÔCovidÕ as each new impositiontakes us deeper into fascism. Tell people they have to do this or thatto get back to ÔnormalÕ, then this and this and this. With each newdemand adding to the ones that went before the populationÕsfreedom is deleted until it disappears. The spider wraps its webaround the ßies more comprehensively with each new diktat. IÕllhighlight this in more detail when I get to the ÔCovidÕ hoax and howit has been pulled o.. Another prime example of the TotalitarianTiptoe is how the Cult-created European Union went from a Ôfree.trade zoneÕ to a centralised bureaucratic dictatorship through theTiptoe of incremental centralisation of power until nations becamemere administrative units for Cult-owned dark suits in Brussels.
The antidote to ignorance is knowledge which the Cult seeksvehemently to deny us, but despite the systematic censorship to thatend the Renegade Mind can overcome this by vociferously seekingout the facts no maay. There is alsoa method of thinking and perceiving Ð knowing Ð that doesnÕt evenneed names, dates, place-type facts to identify the pareveal the story. IÕll get to that in the Þnal chapter. All you need toknow about the manipulation of human society and to what end isstill out there Ð at the time of writing Ð in the form of books, videosand websites for those that really want to breach the walls ofprogrammed perception. To access this knowledge requires theabandonment of the mainstream media as a source of information inthe awareness that this is owned and controlled by the Cult andtherefore promotes mass perceptions that suit the Cult. Mainstreammedia lies all day, every day. That is its function and very reason forbeing. Where it does tell the truth, here and there, is only because thetruth and the Cult agenda very occasionally coincide. If you look forfact and insight to the BBC, CNN and virtually all the rest of themyou are asking to be conned and perceptually programmed.
Know the outcome and youÕll see the journey 
Events seem random when you have no idea where the world isbeing taken. Once you do the random becomes the carefullyplanned. Know the outcome and youÕll see the journey is a phrase Ihave been using for a long time to give context to daily happeningsthat appear unconnected. Does a problem, or illusion of a problem,trigger a proposed ÔsolutionÕ that further drives society in thedirection of the outcome? Invariably the answer will be yes and therandom Ð abracadabra Ð becomes the clearly coordinated. So what isthis outcome that unlocks the door to a massively expandedunderstanding of daily events? I will summarise its major aspects Ðthe Þne detail is in my other books Ð and those new to thisinformation will see that the world they thought they were living inis a very di.erent place. The foundation of the Cult agenda is theincessant centralisation of power and all such centralisation isultimately in pursuit of Cult control on a global level. I havedescribed for a long time the planned world structure of top-downdictatorship as the Hunger Games Society. The term obviouslycomes from the movie series which portrayed a world in which afew living in military-protected hi-tech luxury were the overlords ofa population condemned to abject poverty in isolated ÔsectorsÕ thatwere not allowed to interact. ÔCovidÕ lockdowns and travel bansanyone? The ÔHunger GamesÕ pyramid of structural control has theinner circle of the Cult at the top with prepopulation at the bofor survival on the Cult. The whole structure is planned to beprotected and enforced by a military-police state (Fig 4).
Here you have the reason for the global lockdowns of the fakepandemic to coldly destroy independent incomes and livelihoodsand make everyone dependent on the ÔstateÕ (the Cult that controlsthe ÔstatesÕ). I have warned in my books for many years about theplan to introduce a Ôguaranteed incomeÕ Ð a barely survivablepiasdestroyed by AI technology and now even more comprehensively atgreat speed by the ÔCovidÕ scam. Once the pandemic was played andlockdown consequences began to delete independent income theauthorities began to talk right on cue about the need for aguaranteed income and a ÔGreat ResetÕ. Guaranteed income will bepresented as benevolent governments seeking to help a desperatepeople Ð desperate as a direct result of actions of the samegovernments. The truth is that such payments are a trap. You willonly get them if you do exactly what the authorities demandincluding mass vaccination (genetic manipulation). We have seenthis theme already in Australia where those dependent ongovernment beneÞts have them reduced if parents donÕt agree tohave their children vaccinated according to an insane health-destroying government-dictated schedule. Calculated economiccollapse applies to governments as well as people. The Cult wantsrid of countries through the creation of a world state with countriesbroken up into regions ruled by a world government and superstates like the European Union. Countries must be bankrupted, too,to this end and itÕs being achieved by the trillions in ÔrescuepackagesÕ and furlough payments, trillions in lost taxation, andmoney-no-object spending on ÔCovidÕ including constant all-medium advertising (programming) which has made the mediadependent on government for much of its income. The day ofreckoning is coming Ð as planned Ð for government spending andgiven that it has been made possible by printing money and not byproduction/taxation there is inßation on the way that has thepotential to wipe out monetary value. In that case there will be noneed for the Cult to steal your money. It just wonÕt be worthanything (see the German Weimar Republic before the Nazis tookover). Many have been okay with lockdowns while gepercentage of their income from so-called furlough paymentswithout having to work. Those payments are dependent, however,on people having at least a theoretical job with a business considerednon-essential and ordered to close. As these business go underbecause they are closed by lockdown aer lockdown the furloughstops and it will for everyone eventually. Then what? The Ôthenwhat?Õ is precisely the idea.

Figure 4: The Hunger Games Society structure I have long warned was planned and now the ÔCovidÕ hoax has made it possible. This is the real reason for lockdowns. 
Hired hands 
Between the Hunger Games Cult elite and the dependent populationis planned to be a vicious military-police state (a fusion of the twointo one force). This has been in the making for a long time withpolice looking ever more like the military and carrying weapons tomatch. The pandemic scam has seen this process accelerate so fast aslockdown house arrest is brutally enforced by carefully recruitedfascist minds and gormless system-servers. The police and militaryare planned to merge into a centrally-directed world army in aglobal structure headed by a world government which wouldnÕt beelected even by the election Þxes now in place. The world army isnot planned even to be human and instead wars would be fought,primarily against the population, using robot technology controlledby artiÞcial intelligence. I have been warning about this for decadesand now militaries around the world are being transformed by thisvery AI technology. The global regime that I describe is a particularform of fascism known as a technocracy in which decisions are notmade by clueless and co-opted politicians but by unelectedtechnocrats Ð scientists, engineers, technologists and bureaucrats.Cult-owned-and-controlled Silicon Valley giants are examples oftechnocracy and they already have far more power to direct worldevents than governments. They are with their censorship selecting governments. I know that some are calling the ÔGreat ResetÕ aMarxist communist takeover, but fascism and Marxism are di.erentlabels for the same tyranny. Tell those who lived in fascist Germanyand Stalinist Russia that there was a di.erence in the way theirfreedom was deleted and their lives controlled. I could call it a fascisttechnocracy or a Marxist technocracy and they would be equallyaccurate. The Hunger Games society with its world governmentstructure would oversee a world army, world central bank and singleworld cashless currency imposing its will on a microchippedpopulation (Fig 5). Scan its di.erent elements and see how theillusory pandemic is forcing society in this very direction at greatspeed. Leaders of 23 countries and the World Health Organization(WHO) backed the idea in March, 2021, of a global treaty forÔinternational cooperationÕ in Ôhealth emergenciesÕ and nationsshould Ôcome together as a global community for peacefulcooperation that extends beyond this crisisÕ. Cut the Orwellianbullshit and this means another step towards global government.The plan includes a cashless digital money system that I Þrst warnedabout in 1993. Right at the start of ÔCovidÕ the deeply corrupt TedrosAdhanom Ghebreyesus, the crooked and merely gofer ÔheadÕ of theWorld Health Organization, said it was possible to catch the ÔvirusÕby touching cash and it was bewas ridiculous nonsense and like the whole ÔCovidÕ mind-trick itwas nothing to do with ÔhealthÕ and everything to do with pushingevery aspect of the Cult agenda. As a result of the Tedros lie the useof cash has plummeted. The Cult script involves a single worlddigital currency that would eventually be technologically embeddedin the body. China is a massive global centre for the Cult and if youwatch what is happening there you will know what is planned foreverywhere. The Chinese government is developing a digitalcurrency which would allow Þnes to be deducted immediately viaAI for anyone caught on camera breaking its fantastic list of lawsand the money is going to be programmable with an expiry date toensure that no one can accrue wealth except the Cult and itsoperatives.

Figure 5: The structure of global control the Cult has been working towards for so long and this has been enormously advanced by the ÔCovidÕ illusion. 
Serfdom is so smart 
The Cult plan is far wider, extreme, and more comprehensive thaneven most conspiracy researchers appreciate and I will come to thetrue depths of deceit and control in the chapters ÔWho controls theCult?Õ and ÔEscaping WetikoÕ. Even the world that we know is crazyenough. We are being deluged with ever more sophisticated andcontrolling technology under the heading of ÔsmartÕ. We have smarttelevisions, smart meters, smart cards, smart cars, smart driving,smart roads, smart pills, smart patches, smart watches, smart skin,smart borders, smart pavements, smart streets, smart cities, smartcommunities, smart environments, smart growth, smart planet ...smart everything around us. Smart technologies and methods ofoperation are designed to interlock to create a global Smart Gridconnecting the entirety of human society including human minds tocreate a centrally-dictated ÔhiveÕ mind. ÔSmart citiesÕ is code fordensely-occupied megacities of total surveillance and controlthrough AI. Ever more destructive frequency communicationsystems like 5G have been rolled out without any o.cial testing forhealth and psychological e.ects (colossal). 5G/6G/7G systems areneeded to run the Smart Grid and each one becomes moredestructive of body and mind. Deleting independent income iscrucial to forcing people into these AI-policed prisons by endingprivate property ownership (except for the Cult elite). The CultÕsGreat Reset now openly foresees a global society in which no onewill own any possessions and everything will be rented while theCult would own literally everything under the guise of governmentand corporations. The aim has been to use the lockdowns to destroysources of income on a mass scale and when the people are destituteand in unrepayable amounts of debt (problem) Cult assets comeforward with the pledge to write-o. debt in return for handing overall property and possessions (solution). Everything Ð literallyeverything including people Ð would be connected to the Internetvia AI. I was warning years ago about the coming Internet of Things(IoT) in which all devices and technology from your car to yourfridge would be plugged into the Internet and controlled by AI.Now we are already there with much more to come. The next stageis the Internet of Everything (IoE) which is planned to include theconnection of AI to the human brain and body to replace the humanmind with a centrally-controlled AI mind. Instead of perceptionsbeing manipulated through control of information and censorshipthose perceptions would come direct from the Cult through AI.What do you think? You think whatever AI decides that you think.In human terms there would be no individual ÔthinkÕ any longer. Tooincredible? The ravings of a lunatic? Not at all. Cult-owned craziesin Silicon Valley have been telling us the plan for years withoutexplaining the real motivation and calculated implications. Theseinclude Google executive and ÔfuturistÕ Ray Kurzweil who highlightsthe year 2030 for when this would be underway. He said:
Our thinking ... will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking ... humans will be able to extend their limitations and Ôthink in the cloudÕ ... WeÕre going to put gateways to the cloud in our brains ... WeÕre going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view, thatÕs the nature of being human Ð we transcend our limitations. 
As the technology becomes vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is still human gets smaller and smaller and smaller until itÕs just utterly negligible. 
The sales-pitch of Kurzweil and Cult-owned Silicon Valley is thatthis would make us Ôsuper-humanÕ when the real aim is to make uspost-human and no longer ÔhumanÕ in the sense that we have cometo know. The entire global population would be connected to AI andbecome the centrally-controlled Ôhive-mindÕ of externally-deliveredperceptions. The Smart Grid being installed to impose the CultÕs willon the world is being constructed to allow particular locations Ð evenone location Ð to control the whole global system. From these primecontrol centres, which absolutely include China and Israel, anythingconnected to the Internet would be switched on or o. andmanipulated at will. Energy systems could be cut, communicationvia the Internet taken down, computer-controlled driverlessautonomous vehicles driven o. the road, medical devices switchedo., the potential is limitless given how much AI and Internetconnections now run human society. We have seen nothing yet if weallow this to continue. Autonomous vehicle makers are workingwith law enforcement to produce cars designed to automatically pullover if they detect a police or emergency vehicle ßashing from up to100 feet away. At a police stop the car would be unlocked and thewindow rolled down automatically. Vehicles would only take youwhere the computer (the state) allowed. The end of petrol vehiclesand speed limiters on all new cars in the UK and EU from 2022 aresteps leading to electric computerised transport over whichultimately you have no control. The picture is far bigger even thanthe Cult global network or web and that will become clear when Iget to the nature of the ÔspiderÕ. There is a connection between allthese happenings and the instigation of DNA-manipulatingÔvaccinesÕ (which arenÕt ÔvaccinesÕ) justiÞed by the ÔCovidÕ hoax. Thatconnection is the unfolding plan to transform the human body froma biological to a synthetic biological state and this is why syntheticbiology is such a fast-emerging discipline of mainstream science.ÔCovid vaccinesÕ are infusing self-replicating synthetic geneticmaterial into the cells to cumulatively take us on the TotalitarianTiptoe from Human 1.0 to the synthetic biological Human 2.0 whichwill be physically and perceptually ahundred percent control every thought, perception and deed.Humanity needs to wake up and fast.
This is the barest explanation of where the ÔoutcomeÕ is planned togo but itÕs enough to see the journey happening all around us. Thosenew to this information will already see ÔCovidÕ in a whole newcontext. I will add much more detail as we go along, but for theminutiae evidence see my mega-works, The Answer, The Trigger andEverything You Need to Know But Have Never Been Told.
Now Ð how does a Renegade Mind see the ÔworldÕ?
CHAPTER TWO 
Renegade Perception 
It is one thing to be clever and another to be wise 
George R.R. Martin 
Asimple deÞnition of the di.erence between a programmedmind and a Renegade Mind would be that one sees only dotswhile the other connects them to see the picture. Reading realitywith accuracy requires the observer to (a) know the plannedoutcome and (b) realise that everything, but everything, is connected.
The entirety of inÞnite reality is connected Ð thatÕs its very nature Ðand with human society an expression of inÞnite reality the samemust apply. Simple cause and e.ect is a connection. The e.ect istriggered by the cause and the e.ect then becomes the cause ofanother e.ect. Nothing happens in isolation because it canÕt. Life inwhatever reality is simple choice and consequence. We make choicesand these lead to consequences. If we donÕt like the consequences wecan make di.erent choices and get di.erent consequences whichlead to other choices and consequences. The choice and theconsequence are not only connected they are indivisible. You canÕthave one without the other as an old song goes. A few cannotcontrol the world unless those being controlled allow that to happen
Ð cause and e.ect, choice and consequence. Control Ð who has it andwho doesnÕt Ð is a two-way process, a symbiotic relationship,involving the controller and controlled. ÔThey took my freedomaway!!Õ Well, yes, but you also gave it to them. Humanity issubjected to mass control because humanity has acquiesced to thatcontrol. This is all cause and e.ect and literally a case of give andtake. In the same way world events of every kind are connected andthe Cult works incessantly to sell the illusion of the random andcoincidental to maintain the essential (to them) perception of dotsthat hide the picture. Renegade Minds know this and constantlyscan the world for paotalin understanding the happenings in the world and without thatperspective clarity is impossible. First you know the plannedoutcome and then you identify the steps on the journey Ð the day-by.day apparently random which, when connected in relation to theoutcome, no longer appear as individual events, but as theproverbial chain of events leading in the same direction. IÕll give yousome examples:
Political puppet show 
We are told to believe that politics is ÔadversarialÕ in that di.erentparties with di.erent beliefs engage in an endless tussle for power.There may have been some truth in that up to a point Ð and only apoint Ð but today divisions between Ôdi.erentÕ parties are rhetoricalnot ideological. Even the rhetorical is fusing into one-speak as theparties eject any remaining free thinkers while others succumb to theever-gathering intimidation of anyone with the ÔwrongÕ opinion. TheCult is not a new phenomenon and can be traced back thousands ofyears as my books have documented. Its intergenerational initiateshave been manipulating events with increasing e.ect the more thatglobal power has been centralised. In ancient times the Cult securedcontrol through the system of monarchy in which ÔspecialÕbloodlines (of which more later) demanded the right to rule as kingsand queens simply by birthright and by vanquishing others whoclaimed the same birthright. There came a time, however, whenpeople had matured enough to see the unfairness of such tyrannyand demanded a say in who governed them. Note the word Ðgoverned them. Not served them Ð governed them, hence governmentdeÞned as Ôthe political direction and control exercised over theactions of the members, citizens, or inhabitants of communities,societies, and states; direction of the a.airs of a state, community,etc.Õ Governments exercise control over rather than serve just like themonarchies before them. Bizarrely there are still countries like theUnited Kingdom which are ruled by a monarch and a governmentthat o.cially answers to the monarch. The UK head of state and thatof Commonwealth countries such as Canada, Australia and NewZealand is ÔselectedÕ by who in a single family had unprotected sexwith whom and in what order. Pinch me it canÕt be true. Ouch! Shit,it is. The demise of monarchies in most countries o.ered a potentialvacuum in which some form of free and fair society could arise andthe Cult had that base covered. Monarchies had served its interestsbut they couldnÕt continue in the face of such widespread oppositionand, anyway, replacing a ÔroyalÕ dictatorship that people could seewith a dictatorship Ôof the peopleÕ hiding behind the concept ofÔdemocracyÕ presented far greater manipulative possibilities andways of hiding coordinated tyranny behind the illusion of ÔfreedomÕ.
Democracy is quite wrongly deÞned as government selected bythe population. This is not the case at all. It is government selectedby some of the population (and then only in theory). This ÔsomeÕdoesnÕt even have to be the majority as we have seen so oen in Þrst-past-the-post elections in which the so-called majority party winsfewer votes than the ÔlosingÕ parties combined. Democracy can givetotal power to a party in government from a minority of the votescast. ItÕs a sleight of hand to sell tyranny as freedom. Seventy-fourmillion Trump-supporting Americans didnÕt vote for theÔDemocraticÕ Party of Joe Biden in the distinctly dodgy election in2020 and yet far from acknowledging the wishes and feelings of thatgreat percentage of American society the Cult-owned Bidengovernment set out from day one to destroy them and their right to avoice and opinion. Empty shell Biden and his Cult handlers saidthey were doing this to Ôprotect democracyÕ. Such is the level oflunacy and sickness to which politics has descended. Connect thedots and relate them to the desired outcome Ð a world governmentrun by self-appointed technocrats and no longer even electedpoliticians. While operating through its political agents ingovernment the Cult is at the same time encouraging public distainfor politicians by pupower on the road to deleting them. The idea is to instil a publicreaction that says of the technocrats: ÔWell, they couldnÕt do anyworse than the pathetic politicians.Õ ItÕs all about controllingperception and Renegade Minds can see through that whileprogrammed minds cannot when they are ignorant of both theplanned outcome and the manipulation techniques employed tosecure that end. This knowledge can be learned, however, and fast ifpeople choose to get informed.
Politics may at Þrst sight appear very di.cult to control from acentral point. I mean look at the Ôdi.erentÕ parties and how wouldyou be able to oversee them all and their constituent parts? In truth,itÕs very straightforward because of their structure. We are back tothe pyramid of imposition and acquiescence. Organisations arestructured in the same way as the system as a whole. Political partiesare not open forums of free expression. They are hierarchies. I was anational spokesman for the British Green Party which claimed to bea di.erent kind of politics in which inßuence and power wasdevolved; but I can tell you from direct experience Ð and itÕs farworse now Ð that Green parties are run as hierarchies like all theothers however much they may try to hide that fact or kidthemselves that itÕs not true. A very few at the top of all politicalparties are directing policy and personnel. They decide if you areelevated in the party or serve as a government minister and to dothat you have to be a yes man or woman. Look at all the maverickpolitical thinkers who never ascended the greasy pole. If you want toprogress within the party or reach Ôhigh-o.ceÕ you need to fall intoline and conform. Exceptions to this are rare indeed. Should youwant to run for parliament or Congress you have to persuade thelocal or state level of the party to select you and for that you need toplay the game as dictated by the hierarchy. If you secure election andwish to progress within the greater structure you need to go onconforming to what is acceptable to those running the hierarchyfrom the peak of the pyramid. Political parties are perceptual gulagsand the very fact that there are party ÔWhipsÕ appointed to ÔwhipÕpoliticians into voting the way the hierarchy demands exposes theridiculous idea that politicians are elected to serve the people theyare supposed to represent. Cult operatives and manipulation haslong seized control of major parties that have any chance of forminga government and at least most of those that havenÕt. A new partyforms and the Cult goes to work to inÞltrate and direct. This hasreached such a level today that you see video compilations ofÔleadersÕ of all parties whether Democrats, Republicans,Conservative, Labour and Green parroting the same Cult mantra ofÔBuild Back BeÕ and the ÔGreat ResetÕ which are straight o. theCult song-sheet to describe the transformation of global society inresponse to the Cult-instigated hoaxes of the ÔCovid pandemicÕ andhuman-caused Ôclimate changeÕ. To see Caroline Lucas, the GreenParty MP that I knew when I was in the party in the 1980s, speakingin support of plans proposed by Cult operative Klaus Schwabrepresenting the billionaire global elite is a real head-shaker.
Many parties Ð one master 
The party system is another mind-trick and was instigated to changethe nature of the dictatorship by swapping ÔroyaltyÕ for dark suitsthat people believed Ð though now ever less so Ð represented theirinterests. Understanding this trick is to realise that a single force (theCult) controls all parties either directly in terms of the major ones orthrough manipulation of perception and ideology with others. YoudonÕt need to manipulate Green parties to demand yourtransformation of society in the name of Ôclimate changeÕ when theyare obsessed with the lie that this is essential to Ôsave the planetÕ. Youjust give them a platform and away they go serving your interestswhile believing they are being environmentally virtuous. AmericaÕspolitical structure is a perfect blueprint for how the two or multi-party system is really a one-party state. The Republican Party iscontrolled from one step back in the shadows by a group made up ofbillionaires and their gofers known as neoconservatives or Neocons.
I have exposed them in Þne detail in my books and they were thedriving force behind the policies of the imbecilic presidency of BoyGeorge Bush which included 9/11 (see The Trigger for acomprehensive demolition of the o.cial story), the subsequent Ôwaron terrorÕ (war of terror) and the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq.The laas a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution based on claims byCult operatives, including Bush and British Prime Minister TonyBlair, about Saddam HusseinÕs Ôweapons of mass destructionÕ whichdid not exist as war criminals Bush and Blair well knew.

Figure 6: Different front people, different parties Ð same control system. 
The Democratic Party has its own ÔNeoconÕ group controllingfrom the background which I call the ÔDemoconsÕ and hereÕs thepenny-drop Ð the Neocons and Democons answer to the samemasters one step further back into the shadows (Fig 6). At that levelof the Cult the Republican and Democrat parties are controlled bythe same people and no maer the Cult is inpower. This is how it works in almost every country and certainly inBritain with Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat and Greenparties now all on the same page whatever the rhetoric may be intheir feeble atime of Bush through a think tank called The Project for the NewAmerican Century which in September, 2000, published a documententitled Rebuilding AmericaÕs Defenses: Strategies, Forces, and Resources For a New Century demanding that America Þght Ômultiple,simultaneous major theatre warsÕ as a Ôcore missionÕ to force regime-change in countries including Iraq, Libya and Syria. Neoconsarranged for Bush (ÔRepublicanÕ) and Blair (ÔLabour PartyÕ) to front-up the invasion of Iraq and when they departed the Democonsorchestrated the targeting of Libya and Syria through Barack Obama(ÔDemocratÕ) and British Prime Minister David Cameron(ÔConservative PartyÕ). We have Ôdi.erentÕ parties and Ôdi.erentÕpeople, but the same unfolding script. The more the Cult has seizedthe reigns of parties and personnel the more their policies havetransparently pursued the same agenda to the point where thefascist ÔCovidÕ impositions of the Conservative junta of JackbootJohnson in Britain were opposed by the Labour Party because theywere not fascist enough. The Labour Party is likened to the USDemocrats while the Conservative Party is akin to a British versionof the Republicans and on both sides of the Atlantic they all speakthe same language and support the direction demanded by the Cultalthough some more enthusiastically than others. ItÕs a similar storyin country aer country because itÕs all centrally controlled. Oh, butwhat about Trump? IÕll come to him shortly. Political ÔchoiceÕ in theÔpartyÕ system goes like this: You vote for Party A and they get intogovernment. You donÕt like what they do so next time you vote forParty B and they get into government. You donÕt like what they dowhen itÕs prearty A and why wouldnÕt that bewith both controlled by the same force? Given that only two,sometimes three, parties have any chance of forming a governmentto get rid of Party B that you donÕt like you have to vote again forParty A which É you donÕt like. This, ladies and gentlemen, is whatthey call ÔdemocracyÕ which we are told Ð wrongly Ð is a terminterchangeable with ÔfreedomÕ.
The cult of cults 
At this point I need to introduce a major expression of the GlobalCult known as Sabbatian-Frankism. Sabbatian is also spelt asSabbatean. I will summarise here. I have published major exposŽsand detailed background in other works. Sabbatian-Frankismcombines the names of two frauds posing as ÔJewishÕ men, SabbataiZevi (1626-1676), a rabbi, black magician and occultist whoproclaimed he was the Jewish messiah; and Jacob Frank (1726-1791),the Polish ÔJewÕ, black magician and occultist who said he was thereincarnation of ÔmessiahÕ Zevi and biblical patriarch Jacob. Theyworked across two centuries to establish the Sabbatian-Frankist cultthat plays a major, indeed central, role in the manipulation of humansociety by the Global Cult which has its origins much further back inhistory than Sabbatai Zevi. I should emphasise two points here inresponse to the shrill voices that will scream Ôanti-SemitismÕ: (1)Sabbatian-Frankists are NOT Jewish and only pose as such to hidetheir cult behind a Jewish faade; and (2) my information about thiscult has come from Jewish sources who have long realised that theirsociety and community has been inÞltrated and taken over byinterloper Sabbatian-Frankists. InÞltration has been the foundationtechnique of Sabbatian-Frankism from its o.cial origin in the 17thcentury. ZeviÕs Sabbatian sect ae followingdescribed as the biggest messianic movement in Jewish history,spreading as far as Africa and Asia, and he promised a return for theJews to the ÔPromised LandÕ of Israel. Sabbatianism was not Judaismbut an inversion of everything that mainstream Judaism stood for. Somuch so that this sinister cult would have a feast day when Judaismhad a fast day and whatever was forbidden in Judaism theSabbatians were encouraged and even commanded to do. Thisincluded incest and what would be today called Satanism. Memberswere forbidden to marry outside the sect and there was a system ofkeeping their children ignorant of what they were part of until theywere old enough to be trusted not to unknowingly reveal anythingto outsiders. The same system is employed to this day by the GlobalCult in general which Sabbatian-Frankism has enormouslyinßuenced and now largely controls.
Zevi and his Sabbatians su.ered a setback with the interventionby the Sultan of the Islamic Owhat is now the Republic of Turkey where Zevi was located. TheSultan gave him the choice of proving his ÔdivinityÕ, converting toIslam or facing torture and death. Funnily enough Zevi chose toconvert or at least appear to. Some of his supporters weredisillusioned and dried away, but many did not with 300 familiesalso converting Ð only in theory Ð to Islam. They continued behindthis Islamic smokescreen to follow the goals, rules and rituals ofSabbatianism and became known as Ôcrypto-JewsÕ or the ÔDšnmehÕwhich means Ôto turnÕ. This is rather ironic because they didnÕt ÔturnÕand instead hid behind a fake Islamic persona. The process ofappearing to be one thing while being very much another wouldbecome the calling card of Sabbatianism especially aer ZeviÕs deathand the arrival of the Satanist Jacob Frank in the 18th century whenthe cult became Sabbatian-Frankism and plumbed still new depthsof depravity and inÞltration which included Ð still includes Ð humansacriÞce and sex with children. Wherever Sabbatians go paedophiliaand Satanism follow and is it really a surprise that Hollywood is soinfested with child abuse and Satanism when it was established bySabbatian-Frankists and is still controlled by them? Hollywood hasbeen one of the prime vehicles for global perceptual programmingand manipulation. How many believe the version of ÔhistoryÕportrayed in movies when it is a travesty and inversion (again) of thetruth? Rabbi Marvin Antelman describes Frankism in his book, To Eliminate the Opiate, as Ôa movement of complete evilÕ while Jewishprofessor Gershom Scholem said of Frank in The Messianic Idea in Judaism: ÔIn all his actions [he was] a truly corrupt and degenerateindividual ... one of the most frightening phenomena in the whole ofJewish history.Õ Frank was excommunicated by traditional rabbis, aswas Zevi, but Frank was undeterred and enjoyed vital support fromthe House of Rothschild, the infamous banking dynasty whoseinner-core are Sabbatian-Frankists and not Jews. InÞltration of theRoman Church and Vatican was instigated by Frank with manyDšnmeh ÔturningÕ again to convert to Roman Catholicism with aview to h.acking the reins of power. This was the ever-repeatingmodus operandi and continues to be so. Pose as an advocate of thereligion, culture or country that you want to control and thenmanipulate your people into the positions of authority and inßuencelargely as advisers, administrators and Svengalis for those thatappear to be in power. They did this with Judaism, Christianity(Christian Zionism is part of this), Islam and other religions andnations until Sabbatian-Frankism spanned the world as it doestoday.
Sabbatian Saudis and the terror network 
One expression of the Sabbatian-Frankist Dšnmeh within Islam isthe ruling family of Saudi Arabia, the House of Saud, through whichcame the vile distortion of Islam known as Wahhabism. This is theviolent creed followed by terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda and ISIS orIslamic State. Wahhabism is the hand-chopping, head-choppingÔreligionÕ of Saudi Arabia which is used to keep the people in aconstant state of fear so the interloper House of Saud can continue torule. Al-Qaeda and Islamic State were lavishly funded by the Houseof Saud while being created and directed by the Sabbatian-Frankistnetwork in the United States that operates through the Pentagon,CIA and the government in general of whichever ÔpartyÕ. The frontman for the establishment of Wahhabism in the middle of the 18thcentury was a Sabbatian-Frankist Ôcrypto-JewÕ posing as Islamiccalled Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab. His daughter would marrythe son of Muhammad bin Saud who established the Þrst Saudi statebefore his death in 1765 with support from the British Empire. BinSaudÕs successors would establish modern Saudi Arabia in leaguewith the British and Americans in 1932 which allowed them to seizecontrol of IslamÕs major shrines in Mecca and Medina. They havedictated the direction of Sunni Islam ever since while Iran is themajor centre of the Shiite version and here we have the source of atleast the public conßict between them. The Sabbatian network hasused its Wahhabi extremists to carry out Problem-Reaction-Solutionterrorist aAl-QaedaÕ and ÔIslamic StateÕ tojustify a devastating Ôwar on terrorÕ, ever-increasing surveillance ofthe population and to terrify people into compliance. Anotherinsight of the Renegade Mind is the streetwise understanding thatjust because a country, location or people are at meanthat those apparently representing that country, location or peopleare not behind the aorchestrating the abecause of the societal changes that can be then justiÞed in the nameof Ôsaving the population from terroristsÕ.
I show in great detail in The Trigger how Sabbatian-Frankists werethe real perpetrators of 9/11 and not Ô19 Arab h.ackersÕ who wereblamed for what happened. Observe what was justiÞed in the nameof 9/11 alone in terms of Middle East invasions, mass surveillanceand control that fulÞlled the demands of the Project for the NewAmerican Century document published by the Sabbatian Neocons.What appear to be enemies are on the deep inside players on thesame Sabbatian team. Israel and Arab ÔroyalÕ dictatorships are allruled by Sabbatians and the recent peace agreements between Israeland Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and others areonly making formal what has always been the case behind thescenes. Palestinians who have been subjected to grotesque tyrannysince Israel was bombed and terrorised into existence in 1948 havenever stood a chance. Sabbatian-Frankists have controlled Israel (sothe constant theme of violence and war which Sabbatians love) andthey have controlled the Arab countries that Palestinians havelooked to for real support that never comes. ÔRoyal familiesÕ of theArab world in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, UAE, etc., are all Sabbatianswith allegiance to the aims of the cult and not what is best for theirArabic populations. They have stolen the oil and Þnancial resourcesfrom their people by false claims to be Ôroyal dynastiesÕ with agenetic right to rule and by employing vicious militaries to imposetheir will.
Satanic ÔilluminationÕ 
The Satanist Jacob Frank formed an alliance in 1773 with two otherSabbatians, Mayer Amschel Rothschild (1744-1812), founder of theRothschild banking dynasty, and Jesuit-educated fraudulent Jew,Adam Weishaupt, and this led to the formation of the BavarianIlluminati, Þrstly under another name, in 1776. The Illuminati wouldbe the manipulating force behind the French Revolution (1789-1799)and was also involved in the American Revolution (1775-1783)before and aer the IlluminatiÕs o.cial creation. Weishaupt wouldlater become (in public) a Protestant Christian in archetypalSabbatian style. I read that his name can be decoded as Adam-Weis.haupt or Ôthe Þrst man to lead those who knowÕ. He wasnÕt a leaderin the sense that he was a subordinate, but he did lead those belowhim in a crusade of transforming human society that still continuestoday. The theme was conÞrmed as early as 1785 when a horsemancourier called Lanz was reported to be struck by lighting andextensive Illuminati documents were found in his saddlebags. Theymade the link to Weishaupt and detailed the plan for world takeover.Current events with ÔCovidÕ fascism have been in the making for avery long time. Jacob Frank was jailed for 13 years by the CatholicInquisition aer his arrest in 1760 and on his release he headed forFrankfurt, Germany, home city and headquarters of the House ofRothschild where the alliance was struck with Mayer AmschelRothschild and Weishaupt. Rothschild arranged for Frank to begiven the title of Baron and he became a wealthy nobleman with abig following of Jews in Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empireand other European countries. Most of them would have believed hewas on their side.
The name ÔIlluminatiÕ came from the Zohar which is a body ofworks in the Jewish mystical ÔbibleÕ called the Kabbalah. ÔZoharÕ isthe foundation of Sabbatian-Frankist belief and in Hebrew ÔZoharÕmeans ÔsplendourÕ, ÔradianceÕ, ÔilluminatedÕ, and so we haveÔIlluminatiÕ. They claim to be the ÔIlluminated OnesÕ from theirknowledge systematically hidden from the human population andpassed on through generations of carefully-chosen initiates in theglobal secret society network or Cult. Hidden knowledge includesan awareness of the Cult agenda for the world and the nature of ourcollective reality that I will explore later. Cult ÔilluminationÕ issymbolised by the torch held by the Statue of Liberty which wasgied to New York by French Freemasons in Paris who knew exactlywhat it represents. ÔLibertyÕ symbolises the goddess worshipped inBabylon as Queen Semiramis or Ishtar. The signiÞcance of this willbecome clear. Notice again the ubiquitous theme of inversion withthe Statue of ÔLibertyÕ really symbolising mass control (Fig 7). Amirror-image statute stands on an island in the River Seine in Parisfrom where New York Liberty originated (Fig 8). A large replica ofthe Liberty ßame stands on top of the Pont de lÕAlma tunnel in Pariswhere Princess Diana died in a Cult ritual described in The Biggest Secret. Lucifer Ôthe light bringerÕ is related to all this (and much moreas weÕll see) and ÔLuciferÕ is a central Þgure in Sabbatian-Frankismand its associated Satanism. Sabbatians reject the Jewish Torah, orPentateuch, the ÔÞve books of MosesÕ in the Old Testament known asGenesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy which areclaimed by Judaism and Christianity to have been dictated by ÔGodÕto Moses on Mount Sinai. Sabbatians say these do not apply to themand they seek to replace them with the Zohar to absorb Judaism andits followers into their inversion which is an expression of a muchgreater global inversion. They want to delete all religions and forcehumanity to worship a one-world religion Ð Sabbatian Satanism thatalso includes worship of the Earth goddess. Satanic themes are beingmore and more introduced into mainstream society and whileChristianity is currently the foremost target for destruction theothers are planned to follow.

Figure 7: The Cult goddess of Babylon disguised as the Statue of Liberty holding the flame of Lucifer the Ôlight bringerÕ. 

Figure 8: LibertyÕs mirror image in Paris where the New York version originated. 
Marx brothers 
Rabbi Marvin Antelman connects the Illuminati to the Jacobins in To Eliminate the Opiate and Jacobins were the force behind the FrenchRevolution. He links both to the Bund der Gerechten, or League ofthe Just, which was the network that inßicted communism/Marxismon the world. Antelman wrote:
The original inner circle of the Bund der Gerechten consisted of born Catholics, Protestants and Jews [Sabbatian-Frankist infiltrators], and those representatives of respective subdivisions formulated schemes for the ultimate destruction of their faiths. The heretical Catholics laid plans which they felt would take a century or more for the ultimate destruction of the church; the apostate Jews for the ultimate destruction of the Jewish religion. 
Sabbatian-created communism connects into this anti-religionagenda in that communism does not allow for the free practice ofreligion. The Sabbatian ÔBundÕ became the International CommunistParty and Communist League and in 1848 ÔMarxismÕ was born withthe Communist Manifesto of Sabbatian assets Karl Marx andFriedrich Engels. It is absolutely no coincidence that Marxism, just adi.erent name for fascist and other centrally-controlled tyrannies, isbeing imposed worldwide as a result of the ÔCovidÕ hoax and northat Marxist/fascist China was the place where the hoax originated.The reason for this will become very clear in the chapter ÔCovid: Thecalculated catastropheÕ. The so-called ÔWokeÕ mentality has h.ackedtraditional beliefs of the political le and replaced them with far-right make-believe Ôsocial justiceÕ beokewill, however, be swallowed by its own perceived ÔrevolutionÕ whichis really the work of billionaires and billionaire corporations feigningbeing ÔWokeÕ. Marxism is being touted by Wokers as a replacementfor ÔcapitalismÕ when we donÕt have ÔcapitalismÕ. We have cartelismin which the market is stitched up by the very Cult billionaires andcorporations bankrolling Woke. Billionaires love Marxism whichkeeps the people in servitude while they control from the top.Terminally na•ve Wokers think they are Ôchanging the worldÕ whenitÕs the Cult that is doing the changing and when they have playedtheir vital part and become surplus to requirements they, too, will betargeted. The Illuminati-Jacobins were behind the period known asÔThe TerrorÕ in the French Revolution in 1793 and 1794 when JacobinMaximillian de Robespierre and his Orwellian ÔCommiSafetyÕ killed 17,000 Ôenemies of the RevolutionÕ who had once beenÔfriends of the RevolutionÕ. Karl Marx (1818-1883), whose Sabbatiancreed of Marxism has cost the lives of at least 100 million people, is ahero once again to Wokers who have been systematically keptignorant of real history by their ÔeducationÕ programming. As aresult they now promote a Sabbatian ÔMarxistÕ abomination destinedat some point to consume them. Rabbi Antelman, who spent decadesresearching the Sabbatian plot, said of the League of the Just andKarl Marx:
Contrary to popular opinion Karl Marx did not originate the Communist Manifesto. He was paid for his services by the League of the Just, which was known in its country of origin, Germany, as the Bund der Geaechteten. 
Antelman said the text aas the work of otherpeople and Marx Ôwas only repeating what others already saidÕ.Marx was Ôa hired hack Ð lackey of the wealthy IlluministsÕ. Marxfamously said that religion was the Ôopium of the peopleÕ (part of theSabbatian plan to demonise religion) and Antelman called his books,To Eliminate the Opiate. Marx was born Jewish, but his familyconverted to Christianity (Sabbatian modus operandi) and heaA World Without Jews. In doingso he supported the Sabbatian plan to destroy traditional Jewishnessand Judaism which we are clearly seeing today with the vindictivetargeting of orthodox Jews by the Sabbatian government of Israelover ÔCovidÕ laws. I donÕt follow any religion and it has done muchdamage to the world over centuries and acted as a perceptualstraightjacket. Renegade Minds, however, are always asking why something is being done. It doesnÕt mawith what is happening Ð why is it happening is the question. TheÔwhy?Õ can be answered with regard to religion in that religionscreate interacting communities of believers when the Cult wants todismantle all discourse, unity and interaction (see ÔCovidÕlockdowns) and the ultimate goal is to delete all religions for a one-world religion of Cult Satanism worshipping their ÔgodÕ of whichmore later. We see the same Ôwhy?Õ with gun control in America. IdonÕt have guns and donÕt want them, but why is the Cult seeking todisarm the population at the same time that law enforcementagencies are armed to their molars and why has every tyrant inhistory sought to disarm people before launching the Þnal takeover?They include Hitler, Stalin, Pol Pot and Mao who followedconÞscation with violent seizing of power. You know itÕs a Cultagenda by the people who immediately race to the microphones toexploit dead people in multiple shootings. Ultra-Zionist Cult lackeySenator Chuck Schumer was straight on the case aer ten peoplewere killed in Boulder, Colorado in March, 2121. Simple rule É ifSchumer wants it the Cult wants it and the same with his ultra-Zionist mate the wild-eyed Senator Adam Schi.. At the same timethey were calling for the disarmament of Americans, many of whomlive a long way from a police response, Schumer, Schi. and the restof these pampered clowns were sirazor-wired security fence protected by thousands of armed troopsin addition to their own armed bodyguards. Mom and pop in anisolated home? TheyÕre just potential mass shooters.
Zion Mainframe 
Sabbatian-Frankists and most importantly the Rothschilds werebehind the creation of ÔZionismÕ, a political movement thatdemanded a Jewish homeland in Israel as promised by SabbataiZevi. The very symbol of Israel comes from the German meaning ofthe name Rothschild. Dynasty founder Mayer Amschel Rothschildchanged the family name from Bauer to Rothschild, or ÔRed-ShieldÕin German, in deference to the six-pointed ÔStar of DavidÕ hexagramdisplayed on the familyÕs home in Frankfurt. The symbol laterappeared on the ßag of Israel aer the Rothschilds were centrallyinvolved in its creation. Hexagrams are not a uniquely Jewishsymbol and are widely used in occult (ÔhiddenÕ) networks oen as asymbol for Saturn (see my other books for why). Neither areZionism and Jewishness interchangeable. Zionism is a politicalmovement and philosophy and not a ÔraceÕ or a people. Many Jewsoppose Zionism and many non-Jews, including US President JoeBiden, call themselves Zionists as does Israel-centric Donald Trump.AmericaÕs support for the Israel government is prewith ultra-Zionist billionaires and corporations providing fantasticand dominant funding for both political parties. FormerCongresswoman Cynthia McKinney has told how she wasapproached immediately she ran for o.ce to Ôsign the pledgeÕ toIsrael and conÞrm that she would always vote in that countryÕs bestinterests. All American politicians are approached in this way.Anyone who refuses will get no support or funding from theenormous and all-powerful Zionist lobby that includes organisationslike mega-lobby group AIPAC, the American Israel Public A.airsCommirumpÕs biggest funder was ultra-Zionist casino andmedia billionaire Sheldon Adelson while major funders of theDemocratic Party include ultra-Zionist George Soros and ultra-Zionist Þnancial and media mogul, Haim Saban. Some may reel backat the suggestion that Soros is an Israel-Þrster (Sabbatian-controlledIsrael-Þrster), but Renegade Minds watch the actions not the wordsand everywhere Soros donates his billions the Sabbatian agendabeneÞts. In the spirit of Sabbatian inversion Soros pledged $1 billionfor a new university network to promote Ôliberal values and tackleintoleranceÕ. He made the announcement during his annual speechat the Cult-owned World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, inJanuary, 2020, aer his Ôharsh criticismÕ of Ôauthoritarian rulersÕaround the world. You can only laugh at such brazen mendacity.How he doesnÕt laugh is the mystery. Translated from the OrwellianÔliberal values and tackle intoleranceÕ means teaching non-whitepeople to hate white people and for white people to loathethemselves for being born white. The reason for that will becomeclear.
The ÔAnti-SemitismÕ fraud 
Zionists support the Jewish homeland in the land of Palestine whichhas been the Sabbatian-Rothschild goal for so long, but not for thebeneÞt of Jews. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism Industryhave skewed public and political opinion to equate opposing theviolent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket aof all Jewish people. Sabbatians and their global Anti-SemitismIndustry have skewed public and political opinion to equateopposing the violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket acondemnation of all Jewish people. This is nothing more than aSabbatian protection racket to stop legitimate investigation andexposure of their agendas and activities. The o.cial deÞnition ofÔanti-SemitismÕ has more recently been expanded to include criticismof Zionism Ð a political movement Ð and this was done to further stopexposure of Sabbatian inÞltrators who created Zionism as we knowit today in the 19th century. Renegade Minds will talk about thesesubjects when they know the shit that will come their way. Peoplemust decide if they want to know the truth or just cower in thecorner in fear of what others will say. Sabbatians have been trying tolabel me as Ôanti-SemiticÕ since the 1990s as I have uncovered moreand more about their background and agendas. Useless, gutless,fraudulent ÔjournalistsÕ then just repeat the smears without questionand on the day I was writing this section a pair of unquestioningrepeaters called Ben Quinn and Archie Bland (how appropriate)outright called me an Ôanti-SemiteÕ in the establishment propagandasheet, the London Guardian, with no supporting evidence. TheSabbatian Anti-Semitism Industry said so and who are they toquestion that? They wouldnÕt dare. Ironically ÔSemiticÕ refers to agroup of languages in the Middle East that are almost entirelyArabic. ÔAnti-SemitismÕ becomes Ôanti-ArabÕ which if theconsequences of this misunderstanding were not so grave would behilarious. DonÕt bother telling Quinn and Bland. I donÕt want toconfuse them, bless Ôem. One reason I am dubbed Ôanti-SemiticÕ isthat I wrote in the 1990s that Jewish operatives (Sabbatians) wereheavily involved in the Russian Revolution when Sabbatiansoverthrew the Romanov dynasty. This apparently made me Ôanti-SemiticÕ. Oh, really? Here is a section from The Trigger:
British journalist Robert Wilton confirmed these themes in his 1920 book The Last Days of the Romanovs when he studied official documents from the Russian government to identify the members of the Bolshevik ruling elite between 1917 and 1919. The Central Committee included 41 Jews among 62 members; the Council of the PeopleÕs Commissars had 17 Jews out of 22 members; and 458 of the 556 most important Bolshevik positions between 1918 and 1919 were occupied by Jewish people. Only 17 were Russian. Then there were the 23 Jews among the 36 members of the vicious Cheka Soviet secret police established in 1917 who would soon appear all across the country. 
Professor Robert Service of Oxford University, an expert on 20th century Russian history, found evidence that [ÔJewishÕ] Leon Trotsky had sought to make sure that Jews were enrolled in the Red Army and were disproportionately represented in the Soviet civil bureaucracy that included the Cheka which performed mass arrests, imprisonment and executions of Ôenemies of the peopleÕ. A US State Department Decimal File (861.00/5339) dated November 13th, 1918, names [Rothschild banking agent in America] Jacob Schiff and a list of ultra-Zionists as funders of the Russian Revolution leading to claims of a ÔJewish plotÕ, but the key point missed by all is they were not ÔJewsÕ Ð they were Sabbatian-Frankists. 
BritainÕs Winston Churchill made the same error by mistake orotherwise. He wrote in a 1920 edition of the Illustrated Sunday Herald that those behind the Russian revolution were part of a Ôworldwideconspiracy for the overthrow of civilisation and for thereconstitution of society on the basis of arrested development, ofenvious malevolence, and impossible equalityÕ (see ÔWokeÕ todaybecause that has been created by the same network). Churchill saidthere was no need to exaggerate the part played in the creation ofBolshevism and in the actual bringing about of the RussianRevolution Ôby these international and for the most part atheisticalJewsÕ [Ôatheistical JewsÕ = Sabbatians]. Churchill said it is certainly avery great one and probably outweighs all others: ÔWith the notableexception of Lenin, the majority of the leading Þgures are Jews.Õ Hewent on to describe, knowingly or not, the Sabbatian modusoperandi of placing puppet leaders nominally in power while theycontrol from the background:
Moreover, the principal inspiration and driving power comes from the Jewish leaders. Thus Tchitcherin, a pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate, Litvinoff, and the influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski cannot be compared with the power of Trotsky, or of Zinovieff, the Dictator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd), or of Krassin or Radek Ð all Jews. In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Jews is even more astonishing. And the prominent, if not indeed the principal, part in the system of terrorism applied by the Extraordinary Commissions for Combatting Counter-Revolution has been taken by Jews, and in some notable cases by Jewesses. 
What I said about seriously disproportionate involvement in theRussian Revolution by Jewish ÔrevolutionariesÕ (Sabbatians) isprovable fact, but truth is no defence against the Sabbatian Anti-Semitism Industry, its repeater parrots like Quinn and Bland, andthe now breathtaking network of so-called ÔWokeÕ Ôanti-hateÕ groupswith interlocking leaderships and funding which have the role ofdiscrediting and silencing anyone who gets too close to exposing theSabbatians. We have seen Ôtruth is no defenceÕ conÞrmed in legaljudgements with the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission inCanada decreeing this: ÔTruthful statements can be presented in amanner that would meet the deÞnition of hate speech, and not alltruthful statements must be free from restriction.Õ Most Ôanti-hateÕactivists, who are themselves consumed by hatred, are too stupidand ignorant of the world to know how they are being used. Theyare far too far up their own virtue-signalling arses and itÕs far toodark for them to see anything.
The ÔrevolutionÕ game 
The background and methods of the ÔRussianÕ Revolution arestraight from the Sabbatian playbook seen in the French Revolutionand endless others around the world that appear to start as arevolution of the people against tyrannical rule and end up with aregime change to more tyrannical rule overtly or covertly. Wars,terror aerthrows follow the Sabbatian cultthrough history with its agents creating them as Problem-Reaction-Solutions to remove opposition on the road to world domination.Sabbatian dots connect the Rothschilds with the Illuminati, Jacobinsof the French Revolution, the ÔBundÕ or League of the Just, theInternational Communist Party, Communist League and theCommunist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels that wouldlead to the Rothschild-funded Russian Revolution. The sequencecomes under the heading of Ôcreative destructionÕ when you advanceto your global goal by continually destroying the status quo to installa new status quo which you then also destroy. The two world warscome to mind. With each new status quo you move closer to yourplanned outcome. Wars and mass murder are to Sabbatians acollective blood sacriÞce ritual. They are obsessed with death formany reasons and one is that death is an inversion of life. Satanistsand Sabbatians are obsessed with death and oen target churchesand churchyards for their rituals. Inversion-obsessed Sabbatiansexplain the use of inverted symbolism including the inverted pentagram and inverted cross. The inversion of the cross has beenrelated to targeting Christianity, but the cross was a religious symbollong before Christianity and its inversion is a statement about theSabbatian mentality and goals more than any single religion.
Sabbatians operating in Germany were behind the rise of theoccult-obsessed Nazis and the subsequent Jewish exodus fromGermany and Europe to Palestine and the United States aer WorldWar Two. The Rothschild dynasty was at the forefront of this both aspolitical manipulators and by funding the operation. Why wouldSabbatians help to orchestrate the horrors inßicted on Jews by theNazis and by Stalin aer they organised the Russian Revolution?Sabbatians hate Jews and their religion, thatÕs why. They pose asJews and secure positions of control within Jewish society and playthe Ôanti-SemitismÕ card to protect themselves from exposurethrough a global network of organisations answering to theSabbatian-created-and-controlled globe-spanning intelligencenetwork that involves a stunning web of military-intelligenceoperatives and operations for a tiny country of just nine million.Among them are Jewish assets who are not Sabbatians but have beenconvinced by them that what they are doing is for the good of Israeland the Jewish community to protect them from what they havebeen programmed since childhood to believe is a Jew-hating hostileworld. The Jewish community is just a highly convenient cover tohide the true nature of Sabbatians. Anyone getheir game is accused by Sabbatian place-people and gofers of Ôanti-SemitismÕ and claiming that all Jews are part of a plot to take overthe world. I am not saying that. I am saying that Sabbatians Ð the real Jew-haters Ð have inÞltrated the Jewish community to use them bothas a cover and an Ôanti-SemiticÕ defence against exposure. Thus wehave the Anti-Semitism Industry targeted researchers in this wayand most Jewish people think this is justiÞed and genuine. TheydonÕt know that their ÔJewishÕ leaders and institutions of state,intelligence and military are not controlled by Jews at all, but cultistsand stooges of Sabbatian-Frankism. I once added my name to a pro-Jewish freedom petition online and the next time I looked my namewas gone and text had been added to the petition blurb to aas an Ôanti-SemiteÕ such is the scale of perceptual programming.
Moving on America 
I tell the story in The Trigger and a chapter called ÔAtlantic CrossingÕhow particularly aer Israel was established the Sabbatians movedin on the United States and eventually grasped control ofgovernment administration, the political system via both Democratsand Republicans, the intelligence community like the CIA andNational Security Agency (NSA), the Pentagon and mass media.Through this seriously compartmentalised network Sabbatians andtheir operatives in Mossad, Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) and USagencies pulled o. 9/11 and blamed it on 19 ÔAl-Qaeda h.ackersÕdominated by men from, or connected to, Sabbatian-ruled SaudiArabia. The Ô19Õ were not even on the planes let alone ßew those bigpassenger jets into buildings while being largely incompetent atpiloting one-engine light aircra. ÔH.ackerÕ Hani Hanjour who issaid to have ßown American Airlines Flight 77 into the Pentagonwith a turn and manoeuvre most professional pilots said they wouldhave struggled to do was banned from renting a small plane byinstructors at the Freeway Airport in Bowie, Maryland, just six weeks earlier on the grounds that he was an incompetent pilot. The Jewishpopulation of the world is just 0.2 percent with even that almostentirely concentrated in Israel (75 percent Jewish) and the UnitedStates (around two percent). This two percent and globally 0.2percent refers to Jewish people and not Sabbatian interlopers who area fraction of that fraction. What a sobering thought when you thinkof the fantastic inßuence on world a.airs of tiny Israel and that theProject for the New America Century (PNAC) which laid out theblueprint in September, 2000, for AmericaÕs war on terror and regimechange wars in Iraq, Libya and Syria was founded and dominated bySabbatians known as ÔNeoconsÕ. The document conceded that thisplan would not be supported politically or publicly without a majorasend troops to war across the Middle East. Sabbatian Neocons said:
... [The] process of transformation ... [war and regime change] ... is likely to be a long one, absent some catastrophic and catalysing event Ð like a new Pearl Harbor. 
Four months later many of those who produced that documentcame to power with their inane puppet George Bush from the long.time Sabbatian Bush family. They included Sabbatian Dick Cheneywho was o.cially vice-president, but really de-facto president forthe entirety of the ÔBushÕ government. Nine months aer the ÔBushÕinauguration came what Bush called at the time Ôthe Pearl Harbor ofthe 21st centuryÕ and with typical Sabbatian timing and symbolism2001 was the 60th anniversary of the aAir Force on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, which allowed PresidentFranklin Delano Roosevelt to take the United States into a Sabbatian.instigated Second World War that he said in his election campaignthat he never would. The evidence is overwhelming that Rooseveltand his military and intelligence networks knew the aascoming and did nothing to stop it, but they did make sure thatAmericaÕs most essential naval ships were not in Hawaii at the time.Three thousand Americans died in the Pearl Harbor aas theydid on September 11th. By the 9/11 year of 2001 Sabbatians hadwidely inÞltrated the US government, military and intelligenceoperations and used their compartmentalised assets to pull o. theÔAl-QaedaÕ aou read The Trigger it will blow your mind tosee the ues(Sabbatian inÞltrators) in essential positions of political, security,legal, law enforcement, Þnancial and business power before, during,and aer the acover their tracks Ð and I do mean staggering when you think of that
0.2 percent of the world population and two percent of Americanswhich are Jewish while Sabbatian inÞltrators are a fraction of that. Acentral foundation of the 9/11 conspiracy was the h.acking ofgovernment, military, Air Force and intelligence computer systemsin real time through Ôback-doorÕ access made possible by Israeli(Sabbatian) Ôcyber securityÕ soware. Sabbatian-controlled Israel ison the way to rivalling Silicon Valley for domination of cyberspaceand is becoming the dominant force in cyber-security which givesthem access to entire computer systems and their passcodes acrossthe world. Then add to this that Zionists head (o.cially) SiliconValley giants like Google (Larry Page and Sergey Brin), Google-owned YouTube (Susan Wojcicki), Facebook (Mark Zuckerberg andSheryl Sandberg), and Apple (Chairman Arthur D. Levinson), andthat ultra-Zionist hedge fund billionaire Paul Singer has a $1 billionstake in TwiJack Dorsey. As cable news host Tucker Carlson said of Dorsey:ÔThere used to be debate in the medical community whetherdropping a ton of acid had permanent e.ects and I think that debatehas now ended.Õ Carlson made the comment aer Dorsey told ahearing on Capitol Hill (if you cut through his bullshit) that hebelieved in free speech so long as he got to decide what you can hearand see. These Ôbig namesÕ of Silicon Valley are only front men andwomen for the Global Cult, not least the Sabbatians, who are the truecontrollers of these corporations. Does anyone still wonder whythese same people and companies have been ferociously censoringand banning people (like me) for exposing any aspect of the Cultagenda and especially the truth about the ÔCovidÕ hoax whichSabbatians have orchestrated?
The Je.rey Epstein paedophile ring was a Sabbatian operation. Hewas o.cially ÔJewishÕ but he was a Sabbatian and women abused bythe ring have told me about the high number of ÔJewishÕ peopleinvolved. The Epstein horror has Sabbatian wrier it andmatches perfectly their modus operandi and obsession with sex andritual. Epstein was running a Sabbatian blackmail ring in whichfamous people with political and other inßuence were providedwith young girls for sex while everything was being Þlmed andrecorded on hidden cameras and microphones at his New Yorkhouse, Caribbean island and other properties. Epstein survivorshave described this surveillance system to me and some have gonepublic. Once the famous politician or other Þgure knew he or shewas on video they tended to do whatever they were told. Here we goagain Éwhen youÕve got them by the balls their hearts and mindswill follow. Sabbatians use this blackmail technique on a wide scaleacross the world to entrap politicians and others they need to act asdemanded. EpsteinÕs private plane, the infamous ÔLolita ExpressÕ,had many well-known passengers including Bill Clinton while BillGates has ßown on an Epstein plane and met with him four yearsaer Epstein had been jailed for paedophilia. They subsequently metmany times at EpsteinÕs home in New York according to a witnesswho was there. EpsteinÕs infamous side-kick was Ghislaine Maxwell,daughter of Mossad agent and ultra-Zionist mega-crooked Britishbusinessman, Bob Maxwell, who at one time owned the Daily Mirror newspaper. Maxwell was murdered at sea on his boat in 1991 bySabbatian-controlled Mossad when he became a liability with his
business empire collapsing as a former Mossad operative hasconÞrmed (see The Trigger).
Money, money, money, funny money É 
Before I come to the Sabbatian connection with the last three USpresidents I will lay out the crucial importance to Sabbatians ofcontrolling banking and Þnance. Sabbatian Mayer AmschelRothschild set out to dominate this arena in his familyÕs quest fortotal global control. What is freedom? It is, in e.ect, choice. Themore choices you have the freer you are and the fewer your choicesthe more you are enslaved. In the global structure created overcenturies by Sabbatians the biggest decider and restrictor of choice isÉ money. Across the world if you ask people what they would liketo do with their lives and why they are not doing that they will replyÔI donÕt have the moneyÕ. This is the idea. A global elite of multi-billionaires are described as ÔgreedyÕ and that is true on one level;but control of money Ð who has it and who doesnÕt Ð is not primarilyabout greed. ItÕs about control. Sabbatians have seized ever morecontrol of Þnance and sucked the wealth of the world out of thehands of the population. We talk now, aer all, about the ÔOne.percentÕ and even then the wealthiest are a lot fewer even than that.This has been made possible by a money scam so outrageous and sovast it could rightly be called the scam of scams founded on creatingÔmoneyÕ out of nothing and ÔloaningÕ that with interest to thepopulation. Money out of nothing is called ÔcreditÕ. Sabbatians haveasserted control over governments and banking ever morecompletely through the centuries and secured Þnancial laws thatallow banks to lend hugely more than they have on deposit in aconÞdence trick known as fractional reserve lending. Imagine if youcould lend money that doesnÕt exist and charge the recipient interestfor doing so. You would end up in jail. Bankers by contrast end up inmansions, private jets, Malibu and Monaco.
Banks are only required to keep a fraction of their deposits andwealth in their vaults and they are allowed to lend ÔmoneyÕ theydonÕt have called Ôcredit. Go into a bank for a loan and if you succeedthe banker will not move any real wealth into your account. Theywill type into your account the amount of the agreed ÔloanÕ Ð say£100,000. This is not wealth that really exists; it is non-existent, fresh-air, created-out-of-nothing ÔcreditÕ which has never, does not, andwill never exist except in theory. Credit is backed by nothing exceptwind and only has buying power because people think that it hasbuying power and accept it in return for property, goods andservices. I have described this situation as like those cartooncharacters you see chasing each other and when they run over theedge of a cli. they keep running forward on fresh air until one ofthem looks down, realises whatÕs happened, and they all crash intothe ravine. The whole foundation of the Sabbatian Þnancial system isto stop people looking down except for periodic moments when theywant to crash the system (as in 2008 and 2020 ongoing) and reap therewards from all the property, businesses and wealth their borrowershad signed over as ÔcollateralÕ in return for a ÔloanÕ of fresh air. Mostpeople think that money is somehow created by governments whenit comes into existence from the start as a debt through banksÔlendingÕ illusory money called credit. Yes, the very currency ofexchange is a debt from day one issued as an interest-bearing loan.Why donÕt governments create money interest-free and lend it totheir people interest-free? Governments are controlled by Sabbatiansand the Þnancial system is controlled by Sabbatians for whominterest-free money would be a nightmare come true. Sabbatiansunderpin their Þnancial domination through their global network ofcentral banks, including the privately-owned US Federal Reserveand BritainÕs Bank of England, and this is orchestrated by aprivately-owned central bank coordination body called the Bank forInternational Sesuspects including the Rockefellers and Rothschilds. Central bankchiefs donÕt answer to governments or the people. They answer tothe Bank for International Se, in other words, the GlobalCult which is dominated today by Sabbatians.
Built-in disaster 
There are so many constituent scams within the overall bankingscam. When you take out a loan of thin-air credit only the amount ofthat loan is theoretically brought into circulation to add to theamount in circulation; but you are paying back the principle plusinterest. The additional interest is not created and this means thatwith every ÔloanÕ there is a shortfall in the money in circulationbetween what is borrowed and what has to be paid back. There isnever even close to enough money in circulation to repay alloutstanding public and private debt including interest. Coldlyweaved in the very fabric of the system is the certainty that somewill lose their homes, businesses and possessions to the bankingÔlenderÕ. This is less obvious in times of ÔboomÕ when the amount ofmoney in circulation (and the debt) is expanding through morepeople wanting and gemoney supply contracts it becomes painfully obvious that there isnot enough money to service all debt and interest. This is lessobvious in times of ÔboomÕ when the amount of money in circulation(and the debt) is expanding through more people wanting andgecontracts and it becomes painfully obvious Ð as in 2008 and currently
Ð that there is not enough money to service all debt and interest.Sabbatian banksters have been leading the human populationthrough a calculated series of booms (more debt incurred) and busts(when the debt canÕt be repaid and the banks get the debtorÕstangible wealth in exchange for non-existent ÔcreditÕ). With eachÔbustÕ Sabbatian bankers have absorbed more of the worldÕs tangiblewealth and we end up with the One-percent. Governments are inbankruptcy levels of debt to the same system and are thereforeowned by a system they do not control. The Federal Reserve,ÔAmericaÕs central bankÕ, is privately-owned and Americanpresidents only nominally appoint its chairman or woman tomaintain the illusion that itÕs an arm of government. ItÕs not. TheÔFedÕ is a cartel of private banks which handed billions to itsassociates and friends aer the crash of 2008 and has been Sabbatian.controlled since it was manipulated into being in 1913 through thecovert trickery of Rothschild banking agents Jacob Schi. and PaulWarburg, and the Sabbatian Rockefeller family. Somehow from aJewish population of two-percent and globally 0.2 percent (Sabbatianinterlopers remember are far smaller) ultra-Zionists headed theFederal Reserve for 31 years between 1987 and 2018 in the form ofAlan Greenspan, Bernard Bernanke and Janet Yellen (now BidenÕsTreasury Secretary) with YellenÕs deputy chairman a Israeli-American duel citizen and ultra-Zionist Stanley Fischer, a formergovernor of the Bank of Israel. Ultra-Zionist Fed chiefs spanned thepresidencies of Ronald Reagan (ÔRepublicanÕ), Father George Bush(ÔRepublicanÕ), Bill Clinton (ÔDemocratÕ), Boy George Bush(ÔRepublicanÕ) and Barack Obama (ÔDemocratÕ). We should reallyadd the pre-Greenspan chairman, Paul Adolph Volcker, ÔappointedÕby Jimmy Carter (ÔDemocratÕ) who ran the Fed between 1979 and1987 during the Carter and Reagan administrations beforeGreenspan took over. Volcker was a long-time associate and businesspartner of the Rothschilds. No mapower the United States economy was directed by the same force.Here are members of the Obama, Trump and Biden administrationsand see if you can make out a common theme.
Barack Obama (ÔDemocratÕ) 
Ultra-Zionists Robert Rubin, Larry Summers, and Timothy Geithnerran the US Treasury in the Clinton administration and two of themreappeared with Obama. Ultra-Zionist Fed chairman AlanGreenspan had manipulated the crash of 2008 through deregulationand jumped ship just before the disaster to make way for ultra-Zionist Bernard Bernanke to hand out trillions to Sabbatian Ôtoo bigto failÕ banks and businesses, including the ubiquitous ultra-ZionistGoldman Sachs which has an ongoing sta. revolving door operationbetween itself and major Þnancial positions in governmentworldwide. Obama inherited the fallout of the crash when he tooko.ce in January, 2009, and fortunately he had the support of hisultra-Zionist White House Chief of Sta. Rahm Emmanuel, son of aterrorist who helped to bomb Israel into being in 1948, and his ultra-Zionist senior adviser David Axelrod, chief strategist in ObamaÕs twosuccessful presidential campaigns. Emmanuel, later mayor ofChicago and former senior fundraiser and strategist for Bill Clinton,is an example of the Sabbatian policy aer Israel was established ofmigrating insider families to America so their children would beborn American citizens. ÔObamaÕ chose this Þnancial teamthroughout his administration to respond to the Sabbatian-instigatedcrisis:
Timothy Geithner (ultra-Zionist) Treasury Secretary; Jacob J. Lew,Treasury Secretary; Larry Summers (ultra-Zionist), director of theWhite House National Economic Council; Paul Adolph Volcker(Rothschild business partner), chairman of the Economic RecoveryAdvisory Board; Peter Orszag (ultra-Zionist), director of the O.ce ofManagement and Budget overseeing all government spending;Penny Pritzker (ultra-Zionist), Commerce Secretary; Jared Bernstein(ultra-Zionist), chief economist and economic policy adviser to VicePresident Joe Biden; Mary Schapiro (ultra-Zionist), chair of theSecurities and Exchange Commission (SEC); Gary Gensler (ultra-Zionist), chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission(CFTC); Sheila Bair (ultra-Zionist), chair of the Federal DepositInsurance Corporation (FDIC); Karen Mills (ultra-Zionist), head ofthe Small Business Administration (SBA); Kenneth Feinberg (ultra-Zionist), Special Master for Executive [bail-out] Compensation.Feinberg would be appointed to oversee compensation (with strings)to 9/11 victims and families in a campaign to stop them having theirday in court to question the o.cial story. At the same time ultra-Zionist Bernard Bernanke was chairman of the Federal Reserve andthese are only some of the ultra-Zionists with allegiance toSabbatian-controlled Israel in the Obama government. ObamaÕsbiggest corporate donor was ultra-Zionist Goldman Sachs which hademployed many in his administration.
Donald Trump (ÔRepublicanÕ) 
Trump claimed to be an outsider (he wasnÕt) who had come to Ôdrainthe swampÕ. He embarked on this goal by immediately appointingultra-Zionist Steve Mnuchin, a Goldman Sachs employee for 17years, as his Treasury Secretary. Others included Gary Cohn (ultra-Zionist), chief operating o.cer of Goldman Sachs, his Þrst Directorof the National Economic Council and chief economic adviser, whowas later replaced by Larry Kudlow (ultra-Zionist). TrumpÕs senioradviser throughout his four years in the White House was hissinister son-in-law Jared Kushner, a life-long friend of Israel PrimeMinister Benjamin Netanyahu. Kushner is the son of a convictedcrook who was pardoned by Trump in his last days in o.ce. Otherultra-Zionists in the Trump administration included: Stephen Miller,Senior Policy Adviser; Avrahm Berkowitz, Deputy Adviser to Trumpand his Senior Adviser Jared Kushner; Ivanka Trump, Adviser to thePresident, who converted to Judaism when she married JaredKushner; David Friedman, Trump lawyer and Ambassador to Israel;Jason Greenblarump Organization executive vice president andchief legal o.cer, who was made Special Representative forInternational Negotiations and the Israeli-Palestinian Conßict; RodRosenstein, Deputy ARepresentative for Venezuela, then Iran; John Eisenberg, NationalSecurity Council Legal Adviser and Deputy Council to the Presidentfor National Security A.airs; Anne Neuberger, Deputy NationalManager, National Security Agency; Ezra Cohen-Watnick, ActingUnder Secretary of Defense for Intelligence; Elan Carr, Special Envoyto monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Len Khodorkovsky, DeputySpecial Envoy to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Reed Cordish,Assistant to the President, Intragovernmental and TechnologyInitiatives. Trump Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of StateMike Pompeo, both Christian Zionists, were also vehementsupporters of Israel and its goals and ambitions.
Donald Ôfree-speech believerÕ Trump pardoned a number ofÞnancial and violent criminals while ignoring calls to pardon JulianAssange and Edward Snowden whose crimes are revealing highlyrelevant information about government manipulation andcorruption and the widespread illegal surveillance of the Americanpeople by US ÔsecurityÕ agencies. ItÕs so good to know that Trump ison the side of freedom and justice and not mega-criminals withallegiance to Sabbatian-controlled Israel. These included a pardonfor Israeli spy Jonathan Pollard who was jailed for life in 1987 underthe Espionage Act. Aviem Sella, the Mossad agent who recruitedPollard, was also pardoned by Trump while Assange sat in jail andSnowden remained in exile in Russia. Sella had ÔßedÕ (was helped toescape) to Israel in 1987 and was never extradited despite beingcharged under the Espionage Act. A Trump White House statementsaid that SellaÕs clemency had been Ôsupported by BenjaminNetanyahu, Ron Dermer, IsraelÕs US Ambassador, David Friedman,US Ambassador to Israel and Miriam Adelson, wife of leadingTrump donor Sheldon Adelson who died shortly before. Otherfriends of Jared Kushner were pardoned along with Sholom Weisswho was believed to be serving the longest-ever white-collar prisonsentence of more than 800 years in 2000. The sentence wascommuted of Ponzi-schemer Eliyahu Weinstein who defrauded Jewsand others out of $200 million. I did mention that Assange andSnowden were ignored, right? Trump gave Sabbatians almosteverything they asked for in military and political support, movingthe US Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem with its critical symbolicand literal implications for Palestinian statehood, and the Ôdeal of theCenturyÕ designed by Jared Kushner and David Friedman whichgave the Sabbatian Israeli government the green light tosubstantially expand its already widespread program of buildingillegal Jewish-only seestBank. This made a two-state ÔsolutionÕ impossible by seizing all theland of a potential Palestinian homeland and that had been the plansince 1948 and then 1967 when the Arab-controlled Gaza Strip, WestBank, Sinai Peninsula and Syrian Golan Heights were occupied byIsrael. All the talks about talks and road maps and delays have beenbuying time until the West Bank was physically occupied by Israelireal estate. Trump would have to be a monumentally ill-informedidiot not to see that this was the plan he was helping to complete.The Trump administration was in so many ways the Kushneradministration which means the Netanyahu administration whichmeans the Sabbatian administration. I understand why manyopposing Cult fascism in all its forms gravitated to Trump, but hewas a crucial part of the Sabbatian plan and I will deal with this inthe next chapter.
Joe Biden (ÔDemocratÕ) 
A barely cognitive Joe Biden took over the presidency in January,2021, along with his fellow empty shell, Vice-President KamalaHarris, as the latest Sabbatian gofers to enter the White House.Names on the door may have changed and the ÔpartyÕ Ð the forcebehind them remained the same as Zionists were appointed to astream of pivotal areas relating to Sabbatian plans and policy. Theyincluded: Janet Yellen, Treasury Secretary, former head of the FederalReserve, and still another ultra-Zionist running the US Treasury aerMnuchin (Trump), Lew and Geithner (Obama), and Summers andRubin (Clinton); Anthony Blinken, Secretary of State; WendySherman, Deputy Secretary of State (so thatÕs ÔBidenÕsÕ Sabbatianforeign policy sorted); Je. Zients, White House coronaviruscoordinator; Rochelle Walensky, head of the Centers for DiseaseControl; Rachel Levine, transgender deputy health secretary (thatÕsÔCovidÕ hoax policy under control); Merrick Garland, AGeneral; Alejandro Mayorkas, Secretary of Homeland Security; CassSunstein, Homeland Security with responsibility for newimmigration laws; Avril Haines, Director of National Intelligence;Anne Neuberger, National Security Agency cybersecurity director(note, cybersecurity); David Cohen, CIA Deputy Director; RonaldKlain, BidenÕs Chief of Sta. (see Rahm Emanuel); Eric Lander, aÔleading geneticistÕ, O.ce of Science and Technology Policy director(see Smart Grid, synthetic biology agenda); Jessica Rosenworcel,acting head of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)which controls Smart Grid technology policy and electromagneticcommunication systems including 5G. How can it be that so manypivotal positions are held by two-percent of the Americanpopulation and 0.2 percent of the world population administrationaer administration no maparty? ItÕs a coincidence? Of course itÕs not and this is whySabbatians have built their colossal global web of interlocking Ôanti.hateÕ hate groups to condemn anyone who asks these glaringquestions as an Ôanti-SemiteÕ. The way that Jewish people horriÞcallyabused in Sabbatian-backed Nazi Germany are exploited to this endis stomach-turning and disgusting beyond words.
Political fusion 
Sabbatian manipulation has reversed the roles of Republicans andDemocrats and the same has happened in Britain with theConservative and Labour Parties. Republicans and Conservativeswere always labelled the ÔrightÕ and Democrats and Labour the ÔleÕ,but look at the policy positions now and the Democrat-Labour ÔleÕhas moved further to the ÔrightÕ than Republicans and Conservativesunder the banner of ÔWokeÕ, the Cult-created far-right tyranny.Where once the Democrat-Labour ÔleÕ defended free speech andhuman rights they now seek to delete them and as I said earlierdespite the ÔCovidÕ fascism of the Jackboot Johnson Conservativegovernment in the UK the Labour Party of leader Keir Starmerdemanded even more extreme measures. The Labour Party has beenvery publicly absorbed by Sabbatians aer a political and mediaonslaught against the previous leader, the weak and inept JeremyCorbyn, over made-up allegations of Ôanti-SemitismÕ both by himand his party. The plan was clear with this Ôanti-SemiteÕ propagandaand what was required in response was a swi and decisive Ôfucko.Õ from Corbyn and a statement to expose the Anti-SemitismIndustry (Sabbatian) agovernment (Sabbatians) and purge the party of all dissent againstthe extremes of ultra-Zionism (Sabbatians). Instead Corbyn and hisparty fell to their knees and appeased the abusers which, bydeÞnition, is impossible. Appeasing one demand leads only to a newdemand to be appeased until takeover is complete. Like I say Ð Ôfucko.Õ would have been a much more e.ective policy and I have used itmyself with great e.ect over the years when Sabbatians are on mycase which is most of the time. I consider that fact a greatcompliment, by the way. The outcome of the Labour Partycapitulation is that we now have a Sabbatian-controlledConservative Party ÔopposedÕ by a Sabbatian-controlled LabourParty in a one-party Sabbatian state that hurtles towards theextremes of tyranny (the Sabbatian cult agenda). In America thesituation is the same. LabourÕs Keir Starmer spends his days on hisknees with his tongue out pointing to Tel Aviv, or I guess nowJerusalem, while Boris Johnson has an Ôanti-Semitism czarÕ in theform of former Labour MP John Mann who keeps Starmer companyon his prayer mat.
Sabbatian inßuence can be seen in Jewish members of the LabourParty who have been ejected for criticism of Israel including thosefrom families that su.ered in Nazi Germany. Sabbatians despise realJewish people and target them even more harshly because it is somuch more di.cult to dub them Ôanti-SemiticÕ although in theirdesperation they do try.
CHAPTER THREE 
The Pushbacker sting 
Until you realize how easy it is for your mind to be manipulated, you remain the puppet of someone elseÕs game 
Evita Ochel 
Iwill use the presidencies of Trump and Biden to show how themanipulation of the one-party state plays out behind the illusionof political choice across the world. No two presidencies could Ð onthe face of it Ð be more di.erent and apparently at odds in terms ofdirection and policy.
A Renegade Mind sees beyond the obvious and focuses onoutcomes and consequences and not image, words and wa.e. TheCult embarked on a campaign to divide America between those whoblindly support its agenda (the mentality known as ÔWokeÕ) andthose who are pushing back on where the Cult and its Sabbatianswant to go. This presents inÞnite possibilities for dividing and rulingthe population by sear with each other and allows aperceptual ring fence of demonisation to encircle the Pushbackers ina modern version of the Licavalry led by Lieutenant Colonel George Custer were drawn into atrap, surrounded and killed by Native American tribes defendingtheir land of thousands of years from being seized by thegovernment. In this modern version the roles are reversed and itÕsthose defending themselves from the Sabbatian government who aresurrounded and the government thatÕs seeking to destroy them. Thistrap was set years ago and to explain how we must return to 2016and the emergence of Donald Trump as a candidate to be Presidentof the United States. He set out to overcome the best part of 20 othercandidates in the Republican Party before and during the primariesand was not considered by many in those early stages to have aprayer of living in the White House. The Republican Party was saidto have great reservations about Trump and yet somehow he wonthe nomination. When you know how American politics works Ðpolitics in general Ð there is no way that Trump could have becomethe partyÕs candidate unless the Sabbatian-controlled ÔNeoconsÕ thatrun the Republican Party wanted that to happen. We saw the proofin emails and documents made public by WikiLeaks that theDemocratic Party hierarchy, or Democons, systematicallyundermined the campaign of Bernie Sanders to make sure thatSabbatian gofer Hillary Clinton won the nomination to be theirpresidential candidate. If the Democons could do that then theNeocons in the Republican Party could have derailed Trump in thesame way. But they didnÕt and at that stage I began to conclude thatTrump could well be the one chosen to be president. If that was thecase the ÔwhyÕ was prebetween Cult agenda-supporting Wokers and Pushbackers whogravitated to Trump because he was telling them what they wantedto hear. His constituency of support had been increasingly ignoredand voiceless for decades and profoundly through the eight years ofSabbatian puppet Barack Obama. Now here was someone speakingtheir language of pulling back from the incessant globalisation ofpolitical and economic power, the exporting of American jobs toChina and elsewhere by ÔAmericanÕ (Sabbatian) corporations, thedeletion of free speech, and the mass immigration policies that hadfurther devastated job opportunities for the urban working class ofall races and the once American heartlands of the Midwest.
Beware the forked tongue 
Those people collectively sighed with relief that at last a politicalleader was apparently on their side, but another trait of theRenegade Mind is that you look even harder at people telling youwhat you want to hear than those who are telling you otherwise.Obviously as I said earlier people wish what they want to hear to betrue and genuine and they are much more likely to believe that thansomeone saying what they donÕt want to here and donÕt want to betrue. Sales people are taught to be skilled in eliciting by calculatedquestioning what their customers want to hear and repeating thatback to them as their own opinion to get their targets to like andtrust them. Assets of the Cult are also sales people in the sense ofselling perception. To read Cult manipulation you have to play thelong and expanded game and not fall for the Vaudeville show ofparty politics. Both American parties are vehicles for the Cult andthey exploit them in di.erent ways depending on what the agendarequires at that moment. Trump and the Republicans were used tobe the focus of dividing America and isolating Pushbackers to openthe way for a Biden presidency to become the most extreme inAmerican history by advancing the full-blown Woke (Cult) agendawith the aim of destroying and silencing Pushbackers now labelledNazi Trump supporters and white supremacists.
Sabbatians wanted Trump in o.ce for the reasons described byultra-Zionist Saul Alinsky (1909-1972) who was promoting the Wokephilosophy through Ôcommunity organisingÕ long before anyone hadheard of it. In those days it still went by its traditional name ofMarxism. The reason for the manipulated Trump phenomenon waslaid out in AlinskyÕs 1971 book, Rules for Radicals, which was hisblueprint for overthrowing democratic and other regimes andreplacing them with Sabbatian Marxism. Not surprisingly his to-dolist was evident in the Sabbatian French and Russian ÔRevolutionsÕand that in China which will become very relevant in the nextchapter about the ÔCovidÕ hoax. Among AlinskyÕs followers havebeen the deeply corrupt Barack Obama, House Speaker Nancy Pelosiand Hillary Clinton who described him as a ÔheroÕ. All three areSabbatian stooges with Pelosi personifying the arrogant corruptidiocy that so widely fronts up for the Cult inner core. Predictably asa Sabbatian advocate of the Ôlight-bringerÕ Alinsky features Luciferon the dedication page of his book as the original radical who gainedhis own kingdom (ÔEarthÕ as we shall see). One of AlinskyÕs goldenradical rules was to pick an individual and focus all aand blame on them and not to target faceless bureaucracies andcorporations. Rules for Radicals is really a Sabbatian handbook withits contents repeatedly employed all over the world for centuries andwhy wouldnÕt Sabbatians bring to power their designer-villain to beused as the individual on which all aasbestowed? This is what they did and the only question for me is howmuch Trump knew that and how much he was manipulated. A bit ofboth, I suspect. This was AlinskyÕs Trump technique from a manwho died in 1972. The technique has spanned history:
Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it, polarize it. DonÕt try to attack abstract corporations or bureaucracies. Identify a responsible individual. Ignore attempts to shift or spread the blame. 
From the moment Trump came to illusory power everything wasabout him. It wasnÕt about Republican policy or opinion, but allabout Trump. Everything he did was presented in negative,derogatory and abusive terms by the Sabbatian-dominated medialed by Cult operations such as CNN, MSNBC, The New York Times and the Je. Bezos-owned Washington Post Ð ÔPick the target, freeze it,personalize it, polarize it.Õ Trump was turned into a demon to beviliÞed by those who hated him and a demi-god loved by those whoworshipped him. This, in turn, had his supporters, too, presented asequally demonic in preparation for the punchline later down the linewhen Biden was about to take o.ce. It was hereÕs a Trump, thereÕs aTrump, everywhere a Trump, Trump. Virtually every news story orhappening was Þltered through the lens of ÔThe DonaldÕ. You lovedhim or hated him and which one you chose was said to deÞne you asSatanÕs spawn or a paragon of virtue. Even supporting some Trumppolicies or statements and not others was enough for an assault onyour character. No shades of grey were or are allowed. Everything isblack and white (literally and Þguratively). A Californian I knew hadher head urump while tellingpeople they should love each other. She was so totally consumed byTrump Derangement Syndrome as it became to be known that thisglaring contradiction would never have occurred to her. BydeÞnition anyone who criticised Trump or praised his opponentswas a hero and this lady described Joe Biden as Ôa kind, honestgentlemanÕ when heÕs a provable liar, mega-crook and vicious pieceof work to boot. Sabbatians had indeed divided America usingTrump as the fall-guy and all along the clock was ticking on theconsequences for his supporters.
In hock to his masters 
Trump gave Sabbatians via Israel almost everything they wanted inhis four years. Ask and you shall receive was the dynamic betweenhimself and Benjamin Netanyahu orchestrated by TrumpÕs ultra-Zionist son-in-law Jared Kushner, his ultra-Zionist Ambassador toIsrael, David Friedman, and ultra-Zionist ÔIsrael adviserÕ, JasonGreenblao were central to the running and protectingfrom collapse of his business empire, the Trump Organisation, andcolossal business failures made him forever beholding to Sabbatiannetworks that bailed him out. By the start of the 1990s Trump owed$4 billion to banks that he couldnÕt pay and almost $1billion of thatwas down to him personally and not his companies. This mega-disaster was the result of building two new casinos in Atlantic Cityand buying the enormous Taj Mahal operation which led tocrippling debt payments. He had borrowed fantastic sums from 72banks with major Sabbatian connections and although the scale ofdebt should have had him living in a tent alongside the highwaythey never foreclosed. A plan was devised to lirump from themire by BT Securities Corporation and Rothschild Inc. and the casewas handled by Wilber Ross who had worked for the Rothschilds for27 years. Ross would be named US Commerce Secretary aTrumpÕs election. Another crucial Þgure in saving Trump was ultra-Zionist ÔinvestorÕ Carl Icahn who bought the Taj Mahal casino. Icahnwas made special economic adviser on Þnancial regulation in theTrump administration. He didnÕt stay long but still managed to Þndtime to make a tidy sum of a reported $31.3 million when he sold hisholdings a.ected by the price of steel three days before Trumpimposed a 235 percent tari. on steel imports. What amazing bits ofluck these people have. Trump and Sabbatian operatives have longhad a close association and his mentor and legal adviser from theearly 1970s until 1986 was the dark and genetically corrupt ultra-Zionist Roy Cohn who was chief counsel to Senator JosephMcCarthyÕs ÔcommunistÕ witch-hunt in the 1950s. Esquire magazinepublished an article about Cohn with the headline ÔDonÕt mess withRoy CohnÕ. He was described as the most feared lawyer in New Yorkand Ôa ruthless master of dirty tricks ... [with] ... more than one MaÞaDon on speed dialÕ. CohnÕs inßuence, contacts, support andprotection made Trump a front man for Sabbatians in New Yorkwith their connections to one of CohnÕs many criminal employers,the ÔRussianÕ Sabbatian MaÞa. Israel-centric media mogul RupertMurdoch was introduced to Trump by Cohn and they started a longfriendship. Cohn died in 1986 weeks aunethical conduct by the Appellate Division of the New York StateSupreme Court. The wheels of justice do indeed run slow given thelength of CohnÕs crooked career.
QAnon-sense 
We are asked to believe that Donald Trump with his fundamentalconnections to Sabbatian networks and operatives has been leadingthe Þght to stop the Sabbatian agenda for the fascistic control ofAmerica and the world. Sure he has. A man entrapped during hisyears in the White House by Sabbatian operatives and whose biggestÞnancial donor was casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson who wasSabbatian to his DNA?? Oh, do come on. Trump has been used todivide America and isolate Pushbackers on the Cult agenda underthe heading of ÔTrump supportersÕ, ÔinsurrectionistsÕ and ÔwhitesupremacistsÕ. The US Intelligence/Mossad Psyop or psychologicaloperation known as QAnon emerged during the Trump years as acentral pillar in the Sabbatian campaign to lead Pushbackers into thetrap set by those that wished to destroy them. I knew from the startthat QAnon was a scam because I had seen the same scenario manytimes before over 30 years under di.erent names and I had wriabout one in particular in the books. ÔNot againÕ was my reactionwhen QAnon came to the fore. The same script is pulled out everyfew years and a new name added to the leaystakes the same form: ÔInsidersÕ or Ôthe good guysÕ in the government.intelligence-military ÔDeep StateÕ apparatus were going to instigatemass arrests of the Ôbad guysÕ which would include the Rockefellers,Rothschilds, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, George Soros, etc., etc.Dates are given for when the Ôgood guysÕ are going to move in, butthe dates pass without incident and new dates are given which passwithout incident. The central message to Pushbackers in each case isthat they donÕt have to do anything because there is Ôa planÕ and it isall going to be sorted by the Ôgood guysÕ on the inside. ÔTrust theplanÕ was a QAnon mantra when the only plan was to misdirectPushbackers into puop they believed to bereal. Beware, beware, those who tell you what you want to hear andalways check it out. Right up to BidenÕs inauguration QAnon wasstill claiming that Ôthe StormÕ was coming and Trump would stay onas president when Biden and his cronies were arrested and jailed. Itwas never going to happen and of course it didnÕt, but what didhappen as a result provided that punchline to the SabbatianTrump/QAnon Psyop.
On January 6th, 2021, a very big crowd of Trump supportersgathered in the National Mall in Washington DC down from theCapitol Building to protest at what they believed to be widespreadcorruption and vote fraud that stopped Trump being re-elected for asecond term as president in November, 2020. I say as someone thatdoes not support Trump or Biden that the evidence is clear thatmajor vote-Þxing went on to favour Biden, a man with cognitiveproblems so advanced he can owithout reading the words wrieleprompter.Glaring ballot discrepancies included serious questions aboutelectronic voting machines that make vote rigging a comparativecinch and hundreds of thousands of paper votes that suddenlyappeared during already advanced vote counts and virtually all ofthem for Biden. Early Trump leads in crucial swing states suddenlybegan to close and disappear. The pandemic hoax was used as theexcuse to issue almost limitless numbers of mail-in ballots with nochecks to establish that the recipients were still alive or lived at thataddress. They were sent to streams of people who had not evenasked for them. Private organisations were employed to gather theseballots and who knows what they did with them before they turnedup at the counts. The American election system has beenmanipulated over decades to become a sick joke with more holesthan a Swiss cheese for the express purpose of dictating the results.Then there was the criminal manipulation of information bySabbatian tech giants like Facebook, TwiYouTube which deleted pro-Trump, anti-Biden accounts and postswhile everything in support of Biden was lewanted Biden to win because aastime for full-on Woke and every aspect of the Cult agenda to beunleashed.
Hunter gatherer 
Extreme Silicon Valley bias included blocking information by theNew York Post exposing a Biden scandal that should have ended hisbid for president in the Þnal weeks of the campaign. Hunter Biden,his monumentally corrupt son, is reported to have sent a laptop tobe repaired at a local store and failed to return for it. Time passeduntil the laptop became the property of the store for non-payment ofthe bill. When the owner saw what was on the hard drive he gave acopy to the FBI who did nothing even though it conÞrmedwidespread corruption in which the Joe Biden family were using hispolitical position, especially when he was vice president to Obama,to make multiple millions in countries around the world and mostnotably Ukraine and China. Hunter BidenÕs one-time businesspartner Tony Bobulinski went public when the story broke in theNew York Post to conÞrm the corruption he saw and that Joe Bidennot only knew what was going on he also proÞted from the spoils.Millions were handed over by a Chinese company with closeconnections Ð like all major businesses in China Ð to the Chinesecommunist party of President Xi Jinping. Joe Biden even boasted at ameeting of the CultÕs World Economic Forum that as vice presidenthe had ordered the government of Ukraine to Þre a prosecutor. Whathe didnÕt mention was that the same man just happened to beinvestigating an energy company which was part of Hunter BidenÕscorrupt portfolio. The company was paying him big bucks for noother reason than the inßuence his father had. Overnight BidenÕspresidential campaign should have been over given that he had liedpublicly about not knowing what his son was doing. Instead almostthe entire Sabbatian-owned mainstream media and Sabbatian.owned Silicon Valley suppressed circulation of the story. This alonewent a mighty way to rigging the election of 2020. Cult assets likeMark Zuckerberg at Facebook also spent hundreds of millions to beused in support of Biden and vote ÔadministrationÕ.
The Cult had used Trump as the focus to divide America and wasnow desperate to bring in moronic, pliable, corrupt Biden tocomplete the double-whammy. No way were they going to let lithings like the will of the people thwart their plan. Silicon Valleywidely censored claims that the election was rigged because it was rigged. For the same reason anyone claiming it was rigged wasdenounced as a Ôwhite supremacistÕ including the pathetically fewRepublican politicians willing to say so. Right across the mediawhere the claim was mentioned it was described as a Ôfalse claimÕeven though these excuses for ÔjournalistsÕ would have done noresearch into the subject whatsoever. Trump won seven million morevotes than any sier achieved while somehow acognitively-challenged soon to be 78-year-old who was hidden awayfrom the public for most of the campaign managed to win morevotes than any presidential candidate in history. It makes no sense.You only had to see election rallies for both candidates to witness theenthusiasm for Trump and the apathy for Biden. Tens of thousandswould arump events while Biden was speaking in empty carparks with oshots to hide the fact that no one was there. It was pathetic to seefootage come to light of Biden standing at a podium makingspeeches only to TV crews and party Þxers while reading the wordswrie Teleprompter screens. So, yes, thoseprotestors on January 6th had a point about election rigging, butsome were about to walk into a trap laid for them in Washington bythe Cult Deep State and its QAnon Psyop. This was the Capitol Hillriot ludicrously dubbed an ÔinsurrectionÕ.
The spider and the fly 
Renegade Minds know there are not two ÔsidesÕ in politics, only oneside, the Cult, working through all ÔsidesÕ. ItÕs a stage show, a puppetshow, to direct the perceptions of the population into focusing ondiversions like parties and candidates while missing the puppeteerswith their hands holding all the strings. The Capitol HillÔinsurrectionÕ brings us back to the Litwo distinct opposing groupings Ð Woke and Pushbackers Ð the trapwas about to be sprung. Pushbackers were to be encircled andisolated by associating them all in the public mind with Trump andthen labelling Trump as some sort of Confederate leader. I knewimmediately that the Capitol riot was a set-up because of two things.One was how easy the rioters got into the building with virtually nocredible resistance and secondly I could see Ð as with the ÔCovidÕhoax in the West at the start of 2020 Ð how the Cult could exploit thesituation to move its agenda forward with great speed. Myexperience of Cult techniques and activities over more than 30 yearshas showed me that while they do exploit situations they havenÕtthemselves created this never happens with events of fundamentalagenda signiÞcance. Every time major events giving cultists theexcuse to rapidly advance their plan you Þnd they are manipulatedinto being for the speciÞc reason of providing that excuse Ð Problem-Reaction-Solution. Only a tiny minority of the huge crowd ofWashington protestors sought to gain entry to the Capitol bysmashing windows and breaching doors. That didnÕt ma. Thewhole crowd and all Pushbackers, even if they did not supportTrump, were going to be lumped together as dangerousinsurrectionists and conspiracy theorists. The lawidespread use through a CIA memo in the 1960s aimed atdiscrediting those questioning the nonsensical o.cial story of theKennedy assassination and it subsequently became widelyemployed by the media. ItÕs still being used by inept ÔjournalistsÕwith no idea of its origin to discredit anyone questioning anythingthat authority claims to be true. When you are perpetrating aconspiracy you need to discredit the very word itself even thoughthe dictionary deÞnition of conspiracy is merely Ôthe activity ofsecretly planning with other people to do something bad or illegalÔand Ôa general agreement to keep silent about a subject for thepurpose of keeping it secretÕ. On that basis there are conspiraciesalmost wherever you look. For obvious reasons the Cult and itslapdog media have to claim there are no conspiracies even thoughthe word appears in state laws as with conspiracy to defraud, tomurder, and to corrupt public morals.
Agent provocateurs are widely used by the Cult Deep State tomanipulate genuine people into acting in ways that suit the desiredoutcome. By genuine in this case I mean protestors genuinelysupporting Trump and claims that the election was stolen. In amongthem, however, were agents of the state wearing the garb of Trumpsupporters and QAnon to pump-prime the Capital riot which somegenuine Trump supporters naively fell for. I described the situationas ÔCome into my parlour said the spider to the ßyÕ. Leaßetsappeared through the Woke paramilitary arm Antifa, the anti-fascistfascists, calling on supporters to turn up in Washington looking likeTrump supporters even though they hated him. Some of thosearrested for breaching the Capitol Building were sourced to Antifaand its stable mate Black Lives Ma. Both organisations are fundedby Cult billionaires and corporations. One man charged for the riotwas according to his lawyer a former FBI agent who had held topsecret security clearance for 40 years. Aof his client, 66-year-old Thomas Edward Caldwell:
He has held a Top Secret Security Clearance since 1979 and has undergone multiple Special Background Investigations in support of his clearances. After retiring from the Navy, he 
worked as a section chief for the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2009-2010 as a GS-12 [mid-level employee]. 
He also formed and operated a consulting firm performing work, often classified, for U.S government customers including the US. Drug Enforcement Agency, Department of Housing and Urban Development, the US Coast Guard, and the US Army Personnel Command. 
A judge later released Caldwell pending trial in the absence ofevidence about a conspiracy or that he tried to force his way into thebuilding. The New York Post reported a Ôlaw enforcement sourceÔ assaying that Ôat least two known Antifa members were spocamera among Trump supporters during the riot while one of therioters arrested was John Earle Sullivan, a seriously extreme BlackLives Marump-hater from Utah who was previously arrestedand charged in July, 2020, over a BLM-Antifa riot in which driverswere threatened and one was shot. Sullivan is the founder of Utah-based Insurgence USA which is an a.liate of the Cult-created-and.funded Black Lives Maement. Footage appeared and wasthen deleted by Twirump supporters calling out AntifainÞltrators and a group was Þlmed changing into pro-Trumpclothing before the riot. Security at the building was pathetic Ð asplanned. Colonel Leroy Fletcher Prouty, a man with long experiencein covert operations working with the US security apparatus, oncedescribed the tell-tale sign to identify who is involved in anassassination. He said:
No one has to direct an assassination Ð it happens. The active role is played secretly by permitting it to happen. This is the greatest single clue. Who has the power to call off or reduce the usual security precautions? 
This principle applies to many other situations and certainly to theCapitol riot of January 6th, 2021.
The sting 
With such a big and potentially angry crowd known to be gatheringnear the Capitol the security apparatus would have had a majorpolice detail to defend the building with National Guard troops onstandby given the strength of feeling among people arriving from allover America encouraged by the QAnon Psyop and statements byDonald Trump. Instead Capitol Police ÔsecurityÕ was ßimsy, weak,and easily breached. The same number of o.cers was deployed ason a regular day and that is a blatant red ßag. They were not sta.edor equipped for a possible riot that had been an obvious possibilityin the circumstances. No protective and e.ective fencing worth thename was put in place and there were no contingency plans. Thewhole thing was basically a case of standing aside and wavingpeople in. Once inside police mostly backed o. apart from oneCapitol police o.cer who ridiculously shot dead unarmed Air Forceveteran protestor Ashli Babbiarning as she climbedthrough a broken window. The ÔinvestigationÕ refused to name orcharge the o.cer athe circumstances. They just liept. The story wasendlessly repeated about Þve people dying in the ÔarmedinsurrectionÕ when there was no report of rioters using weapons.Apart from Babbiand apparently a drug overdose. Capitol police o.cer Brian Sicknickwas reported to have died aextinguisher when he was alive aas over and died laterof what the Washington Medical ExaminerÕs O.ce said was a stroke.Sicknick had no external injuries. The lies were delivered like rapidÞre. There was a narrative to build with incessant repetition of the lieuntil the lie became the accepted Ôeverybody knows thatÕ truth. TheÔBig LieÕ technique of Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels isconstantly used by the Cult which was behind the Nazis and istoday behind the ÔCovidÕ and Ôclimate changeÕ hoaxes. Goebbelssaid:
If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it. The lie can be maintained only for such time as the State can shield the people from the political, economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally important for the State to use all of its powers to repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the State. 
Most protestors had a free run of the Capitol Building. Thisallowed pictures to be taken of rioters in iconic parts of the buildingincluding the Senate chamber which could be used as propagandaimages against all Pushbackers. One Congresswoman described thescene as Ôthe worst kind of non-security anybody could everimagineÕ. Well, the Þrst part was true, but someone obviously didimagine it and made sure it happened. Some photographs mostwidely circulated featured people wearing QAnon symbols and nowthe Psyop would be used to dub all QAnon followers with theubiquitous Þt-all label of Ôwhite supremacistÕ and ÔinsurrectionistsÕ.When a Muslim extremist called Noah Green drove his car at twopolice o.cers at the Capitol Building killing one in April, 2021, therewas no such political and media hysteria. They were justdisappointed he wasnÕt white.
The witch-hunt 
Government prosecutor Michael Sherwin, an aggressive, dark-eyed,professional Roeiler led the ÔinvestigationÕ and to call it over thetop would be to understate reality a thousand fold. Hundreds weretracked down and arrested for the crime of having the wrongpolitical views and people were jailed who had done nothing morethan walk in the building, commiproperty, took a few pictures and leere labelled a Ôthreat tothe RepublicÕ while Biden sat in the White House signing executiveorders wriere dismantling Ôthe RepublicÕ. Evenwhen judges ruled that a mother and son should not be in jail thegovernment kept them there. Some of those arrested have beenbadly beaten by prison guards in Washington and lawyers for oneman said he su.ered a fractured skull and was made blind in oneeye. Meanwhile a woman is shot dead for no reason by a CapitolPolice o.cer and we are not allowed to know who he is never mindwhat has happened to him although that will be nothing. The CultÕsQAnon/Trump sting to identify and isolate Pushbackers and thentarget them on the road to crushing and deleting them was aresounding success. You would have thought the Russians hadinvaded the building at gunpoint and lined up senators for a Þringsquad to see the political and media reaction. CongresswomanAlexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a child in a womanÕs body, a terrible-twos, me, me, me, Woker narcissist of such proportions that wordshave no meaning. She said she thought she was going to die whenÔinsurrectionistsÕ banged on her o.ce door. It turned out she wasnÕteven in the Capitol Building when the riot was happening and theÔbangingÕ was a Capitol Police o.cer. She referred to herself as aÔsurvivorÕ which is an insult to all those true survivors of violent andsexual abuse while she lives her pampered and privileged lifetalking drivel for a living. Her Woke colleague and fellow mega-narcissist Rashida Tlaib broke down describing the devastatinge.ect on her, too, of not being in the building when the rioters werethere. Ocasio-Cortez and Tlaib are members of a fully-Woke groupof Congresswomen known as ÔThe SquadÕ along with Ilhan Omarand Ayanna Pressley. The Squad from what I can see can beidentiÞed by its vehement anti-white racism, anti-white men agenda,and, as always in these cases, the absence of brain cells on activeduty.
The usual suspects were on the riot case immediately in the formof Democrat ultra-Zionist senators and operatives Chuck Schumerand Adam Schi. demanding that Trump be impeached for Ôhis partin the insurrectionÕ. The same pair of prats had led the failedimpeachment of Trump over the invented ÔRussia collusionÕnonsense which claimed Russia had helped Trump win the 2016election. I didnÕt realise that Tel Aviv had been relocated just outsideMoscow. I must Þnd an up-to-date map. The Russia hoax was aSabbatian operation to keep Trump occupied and impotent and tostop any rapport with Russia which the Cult wants to retain as aperceptual enemy to be pulled out at will. Puppet Biden beganaupheaval, division and war across the world. A two-year stage showÔRussia collusion inquiryÕ headed by the not-very-bright former 9/11FBI chief Robert Mueller, with support from 19 lawyers, 40 FBIagents plus intelligence analysts, forensic accountants and othersta., devoured tens of millions of dollars and found no evidence ofRussia collusion which a ten-year-old could have told them on dayone. Now the same moronic Schumer and Schi. wanted a secondimpeachment of Trump over the Capitol ÔinsurrectionÕ (riot) whichthe arrested development of Schumer called another ÔPearl HarborÕwhile others compared it with 9/11 in which 3,000 died and, in thecase of CNN, with the Rwandan genocide in the 1990s in which anestimated 500,000 to 600,000 were murdered, between 250, 000 and500,000 women were raped, and populations of whole towns werehacked to death with machetes. To make those comparisons purelyfor Cult political reasons is beyond insulting to those that su.eredand lost their lives and conÞrms yet again the callous inhumanitythat we are dealing with. Schumer is a monumental idiot and so isSchi., but they serve the Cult agenda and do whatever theyÕre toldso they get looked a. Talking of idiots Ð another inane man whospanned the Russia and Capitol impeachment aas SenatorEric Swalwell who had the nerve to accuse Trump of collusion withthe Russians while sleeping with a Chinese spy called Christine Fangor ÔFang FangÕ which is straight out of a Bond Þlm no doubt starringKlaus Schwab as the bloke living on a secret island and controllinglaser weapons positioned in space and pointing at world capitals.Fang Fang plays the part of BondÕs inÞltrator girlfriend which IÕmsure she would enjoy rather more than sharing a bed with thebrainless Swalwell, lying back and thinking of China. The FBIeventually warned Swalwell about Fang Fang which gave her timeto escape back to the Chinese dictatorship. How very thoughtful ofthem. The second Trump impeachment also failed and hardlysurprising when an impeachment is supposed to remove a sipresident and by the time it happened Trump was no longerpresident. These people are running your country America, well,o.cially anyway. Terrifying isnÕt it?
Outcomes tell the story - always 
The outcome of all this Ð and itÕs the outcome on which RenegadeMinds focus, not the words Ð was that a vicious, hysterical andobviously pre-planned assault was launched on Pushbackers tocensor, silence and discredit them and even targeted their right toearn a living. They have since been condemned as ÔdomesticterroristsÕ that need to be treated like Al-Qaeda and Islamic State.ÔDomestic terroristsÕ is a label the Cult has been trying to make sticksince the period of the Oklahoma bombing in 1995 which wasblamed on Ôfar-right domestic terroristsÕ. If you read The Trigger youwill see that the bombing was clearly a Problem-Reaction-Solutioncarried out by the Deep State during a Bill Clinton administration socorrupt that no dictionary deÞnition of the term would even nearlysu.ce. Nearly 30, 000 troops were deployed from all over Americato the empty streets of Washington for BidenÕs inauguration. Tenthousand of them stayed on with the pretext of protecting the capitalfrom insurrectionists when it was more psychological programmingto normalise the use of the military in domestic law enforcement insupport of the Cult plan for a police-military state. BidenÕs fascistadministration began a purge of Ôwrong-thinkersÕ in the militarywhich means anyone that is not on board with Woke. The CapitolBuilding was surrounded by a fence with razor wire and the Land ofthe Free was further symbolically and literally dismantled. The circlewas completed with the installation of Biden and the exploitation ofthe QAnon Psyop.
America had never been so divided since the civil war of the 19thcentury, Pushbackers were isolated and dubbed terrorists and now,as was always going to happen, the Cult immediately set aboutdeleting what lias lesociety through a swish of the hand of the most controlledÔpresidentÕ in American history leading (o.cially at least) the mostextreme regime since the country was declared an independent stateon July 4th, 1776. Biden issued undebated, dictatorial executiveorders almost by the hour in his opening days in o.ce across thewhole spectrum of the Cult wish-list including diluting controls onthe border with Mexico allowing thousands of migrants to illegallyenter the United States to transform the demographics of Americaand import an election-changing number of perceived Democratvoters. Then there were Biden deportation amnesties for the alreadyillegally resident (estimated to be as high as 20 or even 30 million). Abill before Congress awarded American citizenship to anyone whocould prove they had worked in agriculture for just 180 days in theprevious two years as ÔBig AgÕ secured its slave labour long-term.There were the plans to add new states to the union such as PuertoRico and making Washington DC a state. They are all parts of a planto ensure that the Cult-owned Woke Democrats would bepermanently in power.
Border Ð what border? 
I have exposed in detail in other books how mass immigration intothe United States and Europe is the work of Cult networks fuelled bythe tens of billions spent to this and other ends by George Soros andhis global Open Society (open borders) Foundations. The impact canbe seen in America alone where the population has increased by 100 million in liears mostly through immigration. Iwrote in The Answer that the plan was to have so many peoplecrossing the southern border that the numbers become unstoppableand we are now there under Cult-owned Biden. El Salvador inCentral America puts the scale of what is happening into context. Athird of the population now lives in the United States, much of itillegally, and many more are on the way. The methodology is tocrush Central and South American countries economically andspread violence through machete-wielding psychopathic gangs likeMS-13 based in El Salvador and now operating in many Americancities. Biden-imposed lax security at the southern border means thatit is all but open. He said before his ÔelectionÕ that he wanted to see asurge towards the border if he became president and that was thegreen light for people to do just that ahuman disaster that followed for both America and the migrants.When that surge came the imbecilic Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said itwasnÕt a ÔsurgeÕ because they are Ôchildren, not insurgentsÕ and theterm ÔsurgeÕ (used by Biden) was a claim of Ôwhite supremacistsÕ.
This disingenuous lady may one day enter the realm of the mostbasic intelligence, but it wonÕt be any time soon.
Sabbatians and the Cult are in the process of destroying Americaby importing violent people and gangs in among the genuine toterrorise American cities and by overwhelming services that cannotcope with the sheer volume of new arrivals. Something similar ishappening in Europe as Western society in general is targeted fordemographic and cultural transformation and upheaval. The plandemands violence and crime to create an environment ofintimidation, fear and division and Soros has been funding theelection of district aprosecuting many crimes, reduce sentences for violent crimes andfree as many violent criminals as they can. Sabbatians are creatingthe chaos from which order Ð their order Ð can respond in a classicProblem-Reaction-Solution. A Freemasonic moto says ÔOrdo AbChaoÕ (Order out of Chaos) and this is why the Cult is constantlycreating chaos to impose a new ÔorderÕ. Here you have the reasonthe Cult is constantly creating chaos. The ÔCovidÕ hoax can be seenwith those entering the United States by plane being forced to take aÔCovidÕ test while migrants ßooding through southern borderprocessing facilities do not. Nothing is put in the way of massmigration and if that means ignoring the governmentÕs own ÔCovidÕrules then so be it. They know itÕs all bullshit anyway. Any pushbackon this is denounced as ÔracistÕ by Wokers and Sabbatian fronts likethe ultra-Zionist Anti-Defamation League headed by the appallingJonathan Greenblanot give citizenship and voting rights to more Palestinian Arabs orthe ÔJewish populationÕ (in truth the Sabbatian network) will losecontrol of the country.
Society-changing numbers 
BidenÕs masters have declared that countries like El Salvador are sodangerous that their people must be allowed into the United Statesfor humanitarian reasons when there are fewer murders in largeparts of many Central American countries than in US cities likeBaltimore. That is not to say Central America cannot be a dangerousplace and Cult-controlled American governments have been makingit so since way back, along with the dismantling of economies, in along-term plan to drive people north into the United States. Parts ofCentral America are very dangerous, but in other areas the story isbeing greatly exaggerated to justify relaxing immigration criteria.Migrants are being o.ered free healthcare and education in theUnited States as another incentive to head for the border and there isno requirement to be Þnancially independent before you can enter toprevent the resources of America being drained. You canÕt blamemigrants for seeking what they believe will be a beare being played by the Cult for dark and nefarious ends. Thenumbers since Biden took o.ce are huge. In February, 2021, morethan 100,000 people were known to have tried to enter the USillegally through the southern border (it was 34,000 in the samemonth in 2020) and in March it was 170,000 Ð a 418 percent increaseon March, 2020. These numbers are only known people, not the oneswho get in unseen. The true Þgure for migrants illegally crossing theborder in a single month was estimated by one congressman at250,000 and that number will only rise under BidenÕs current policy.Gangs of murdering drug-running thugs that control the Mexicanside of the border demand money Ð thousands of dollars Ð to letmigrants cross the Rio Grande into America. At the same time gunbaeral times a week betweenrival Mexican drug gangs (which now operate globally) who areequipped with sophisticated military-grade weapons, grenades andarmoured vehicles. While the Capitol Building was being ÔprotectedÕfrom a non-existent ÔthreatÕ by thousands of troops, and others werestill deployed at the time in the Cult Neocon war in Afghanistan, thesouthern border of America was leincompetence, it is cold calculation.
By March, 2021, there were 17,000 unaccompanied children held atborder facilities and many of them are ensnared by people tra.ckersfor paedophile rings and raped on their journey north to America.This is not conjecture Ð this is fact. Many of those designatedchildren are in reality teenage boys or older. Meanwhile Wokersposture their self-purity for encouraging poor and tragic people tocome to America and face this nightmare both on the journey and atthe border with the disgusting Þgure of House Speaker Nancy Pelosigiving disingenuous speeches about caring for migrants. ThewomanÕs evil. Wokers condemned Trump for having children incages at the border (so did Obama, Shhhh), but now they are sleepingon the ßoor without access to a shower with one border facility 729percent over capacity. The Biden insanity even proposed ßyingmigrants from the southern border to the northern border withCanada for ÔprocessingÕ. The whole shambles is being overseen byultra-Zionist Secretary of Homeland Security, the moronic liarAlejandro Mayorkas, who banned news cameras at border facilitiesto stop Americans seeing what was happening. Mayorkas said therewas not a ban on news crews; it was just that they were not allowedto Þlm. Alongside him at Homeland Security is another ultra-ZionistCass Sunstein appointed by Biden to oversee new immigration laws.Sunstein despises conspiracy researchers to the point where hesuggests they should be banned or taxed for having such views. Theman is not bonkers or anything. HeÕs perfectly well-adjusted, butadjusted to what is the question. Criticise what is happening andyou are a Ôwhite supremacistÕ when earlier non-white immigrantsalso oppose the numbers which e.ect their lives and opportunities.Black people in poor areas are particularly damaged by uncontrolledimmigration and the increased competition for work opportunitieswith those who will work for less. They are also losing voting poweras Hispanics become more dominant in former black areas. ItÕs adownward spiral for them while the billionaires behind the policydrone on about how much they care about black people andÔracismÕ. None of this is about compassion for migrants or blackpeople Ð thatÕs just wind and air. Migrants are instead beingmercilessly exploited to transform America while the countries theyleave are losing their future and the same is true in Europe. Massimmigration may now be the work of Woke Democrats, but it can betraced back to the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (itwasnÕt) signed into law by Republican hero President RonaldReagan which gave amnesty to millions living in the United Statesillegally and other incentives for people to head for the southernborder. Here we have the one-party state at work again.
Save me syndrome 
Almost every aspect of what I have been exposing as the Cultagenda was on display in even the Þrst days of ÔBidenÕ with silencingof Pushbackers at the forefront of everything. A Renegade Mind willview the Trump years and QAnon in a very di.erent light to theirsupporters and advocates as the dots are connected. TheQAnon/Trump Psyop has given the Cult all it was looking for. Wemay not know how much, or lirump realised he was beingused, but thatÕs a side issue. This pincer movement produced thedesired outcome of dividing America and having Pushbackersisolated. To turn this around we have to look at new routes toempowerment which do not include handing our power to otherpeople and groups through what I will call the ÔSave Me SyndromeÕ
Ð ÔI want someone else to do it so that I donÕt have toÕ. We have seenthis at work throughout human history and the QAnon/TrumpPsyop is only the latest incarnation alongside all the others. Religionis an obvious expression of this when people look to a ÔgodÕ or priestto save them or tell them how to be saved and then there are ÔsavemeÕ politicians like Trump. Politics is a diversion and not a ÔsaviourÕ.It is a means to block positive change, not make it possible.
Save Me Syndrome always comes with the same repeating themeof handing your power to whom or what you believe will save youwhile your real ÔsaviourÕ stares back from the mirror every morning.Renegade Minds are constantly vigilant in this regard and alwaysasking the question ÔWhat can I do?Õ rather than ÔWhat can someoneelse do for me?Õ Gandhi was right when he said: ÔYou must be thechange you want to see in the world.Õ We are indeed the people wehave been waiting for. We are presented with a constant rareasons to concede that power to others and forget where the realpower is. Humanity has the numbers and the Cult does not. It has touse diversion and division to target the unstoppable power thatcomes from unity. Religions, governments, politicians, corporations,media, QAnon, are all di.erent manifestations of this power-diversion and dilution. Refusing to give your power to governmentsand instead handing it to Trump and QAnon is not to take a newdirection, but merely to recycle the old one with new names on theposters. I will explore this phenomenon as we proceed and how tobreak the cycles and recycles that got us here through the mists ofrepeating perception and so repeating history.
For now we shall turn to the most potent example in the entirehuman story of the consequences that follow when you give yourpower away. I am talking, of course, of the ÔCovidÕ hoax.
CHAPTER FOUR 
ÔCovidÕ: Calculated catastrophe 
Facts are threatening to those invested in fraud 
DaShanne Stokes 
We can easily unravel the real reason for the ÔCovid pandemicÕhoax by employing the Renegade Mind methodology that Ihave outlined this far. WeÕll start by comparing the long-plannedCult outcome with the ÔCovid pandemicÕ outcome. Know theoutcome and youÕll see the journey.
I have highlighted the plan for the Hunger Games Society whichhas been in my books for so many years with the very fewcontrolling the very many through ongoing dependency. To createthis dependency it is essential to destroy independent livelihoods,businesses and employment to make the population reliant on thestate (the Cult) for even the basics of life through a guaranteedpiambitions would be thwarted. With this knowledge it was easy tosee where the ÔpandemicÕ hoax was going once talk of ÔlockdownsÕbegan and the closing of all but perceived ÔessentialÕ businesses toÔsaveÕ us from an alleged Ôdeadly virusÕ. Cult corporations likeAmazon and Walmart were naturally considered ÔessentialÕ whilemom and pop shops and stores had their doors closed by fascistdecree. As a result with every new lockdown and new regulationmore small and medium, even large businesses not owned by theCult, went to the wall while Cult giants and their frontmen andwomen grew Þnancially faeredenied an income and the right to earn a living and the wealth ofpeople like Je. Bezos (Amazon), Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook) andSergei Brin and Larry Page (Google/Alphabet) have reached recordlevels. The Cult was increasing its own power through furtherdramatic concentrations of wealth while the competition was beingdestroyed and brought into a state of dependency. Lockdowns havebeen instigated to secure that very end and were never anything todo with health. My brother Paul spent 45 years building up a busrepair business, but lockdowns meant buses were running at afraction of normal levels for months on end. Similar stories can toldin their hundreds of millions worldwide. E.orts of a lifetime coldlydestroyed by Cult multi-billionaires and their lackeys in governmentand law enforcement who continued to earn their living from thetaxation of the people while denying the right of the same people toearn theirs. How di.erent it would have been if those making andenforcing these decisions had to face the same Þnancial hardships ofthose they a.ected, but they never do.
Gates of Hell 
Behind it all in the full knowledge of what he is doing and why isthe psychopathic Þgure of Cult operative Bill Gates. His puppetTedros at the World Health Organization declared ÔCovidÕ apandemic in March, 2020. The WHO had changed the deÞnition of aÔpandemicÕ in 2009 just a month before declaring the Ôswine ßupandemicÕ which would not have been so under the previousdeÞnition. The same applies to ÔCovidÕ. The deÞnition hadincludedÉ Ôan infection by an infectious agent, occurringsimultaneously in di.erent countries, with a signiÞcant mortalityrate relative to the proportion of the population infectedÕ. The newdeÞnition removed the need for ÔsigniÞcant mortalityÕ. TheÔpandemicÕ has been fraudulent even down to the deÞnition, butGates demanded economy-destroying lockdowns, school closures,social distancing, mandatory masks, a ÔvaccinationÕ for every man,woman and child on the planet and severe consequences andrestrictions for those that refused. Who gave him this power? TheCult did which he serves like a liwhat his daddy tells him. He and his psychopathic missus evensmiled when they said that much worse was to come (what theyknew was planned to come). Gates responded in the ma-of-factway of all psychopaths to a question about the e.ect on the worldeconomy of what he was doing:
Well, it wonÕt go to zero but it will shrink. Global GDP is probably going to take the biggest hit ever [Gates was smiling as he said this] É in my lifetime this will be the greatest economic hit. But you donÕt have a choice. People act as if you have a choice. People donÕt feel like going to the stadium when they might get infected É People are deeply affected by seeing these stats, by knowing they could be part of the transmission chain, old people, their parents and grandparents, could be affected by this, and so you donÕt get to say ignore what is going on here. 
There will be the ability to open up, particularly in rich countries, if things are done well over the next few months, but for the world at large normalcy only returns when we have largely vaccinated the entire population. 
The man has no compassion or empathy. How could he when heÕsa psychopath like all Cult players? My own view is that even beyondthat he is very seriously mentally ill. Look in his eyes and you cansee this along with his crazy ßailing arms. You donÕt do what he hasdone to the world population since the start of 2020 unless you arementally ill and at the most extreme end of psychopathic. Youespecially donÕt do it when to you know, as we shall see, that casesand deaths from ÔCovidÕ are fakery and a product of monumentalÞgure massaging. ÔThese statsÕ that Gates referred to are based on aÔtestÕ thatÕs not testing for the ÔvirusÕ as he has known all along. Hemade his fortune with big Cult support as an infamously ruthlesssoware salesman and now buys global control of ÔhealthÕ (death)policy without the population he a.ects having any say. ItÕs abreathtaking outrage. Gates talked about people being deeplya.ected by fear of ÔCovidÕ when that was because of him and hisglobal network lying to them minute-by-minute supported by alying media that he seriously inßuences and funds to the tune ofhundreds of millions. HeÕs handed big sums to media operationsincluding the BBC, NBC, Al Jazeera, Univision, PBS NewsHour, ProPublica, National Journal, The Guardian, The Financial Times, The Atlantic, Texas Tribune, USA Today publisher GanneWashington Monthly, Le Monde, Center for Investigative Reporting, PulitzerCenter on Crisis Reporting, National Press Foundation, InternationalCenter for Journalists, Solutions Journalism Network, the PoynterInstitute for Media Studies, and many more. Gates is everywhere inthe ÔCovidÕ hoax and the man must go to prison Ð or a mental facility
Ð for the rest of his life and his money distributed to those he hastaken such enormous psychopathic pleasure in crushing.
The Muscle 
The Hunger Games global structure demands a police-military state
Ð a fusion of the two into one force Ð which viciously imposes thewill of the Cult on the population and protects the Cult from publicrebellion. In that regard, too, the ÔCovidÕ hoax just keeps on giving.Oen unlawful, ridiculous and contradictory ÔCovidÕ rules andregulations have been policed across the world by moronicautomatons and psychopaths made faceless by face-nappy masksand acting like the Nazi SS and fascist blackshirts and brownshirts ofHitler and Mussolini. The smallest departure from the rules decreedby the psychos in government and their clueless gofers were jumpedupon by the face-nappy fascists. Brutality against public protestorssoon became commonplace even on girls, women and old people asthe brave men with the batons Ð the Face-Nappies as I call them Ðbroke up peaceful protests and handed out Þnes like confepeople who couldnÕt earn a living let alone pay hundreds of poundsfor what was once an accepted human right. Robot Face-Nappies ofNo£11,000 for as birthday party. For decades I chartedthe transformation of law enforcement as genuine, decent o.cerswere replaced with psychopaths and the brain dead who wouldhappily and brutally do whatever their masters told them. Now theywere let loose on the public and I would emphasise the point thatnone of this just happened. The step-by-step change in the dynamicbetween police and public was orchestrated from the shadows bythose who knew where this was all going and the same with theperceptual reframing of those in all levels of authority and o.cialadministration through Ôtraining coursesÕ by organisations such asCommon Purpose which was created in the late 1980s and given amassive boost in Blair era Britain until it became a globalphenomenon. Supposed public ÔservantsÕ began to view thepopulation as the enemy and the same was true of the police. Thiswas the start of the explosion of behaviour manipulationorganisations and networks preparing for the all-war on the humanpsyche unleashed with the dawn of 2020. I will go into more detailabout this later in the book because it is a core part of what ishappening.
Police desecrated beauty spots to deter people gathering andarrested women for walking in the countryside alone Ôtoo farÕ fromtheir homes. We had arrogant, clueless sergeants in the Isle of Wightpolice where I live posting on Facebook what they insisted thepopulation must do or else. A schoolmaster sergeant called Radfordlooked young enough for me to ask if his mother knew he was out,but he was posting what he expected people to do while a SergeantWilkinson boasted about Þning lads for meeting in a McDonaldÕs carpark where they went to get a lockdown takeaway. Wilkinson addedthat he had even cancelled their order. What a pair of prats thesepeople are and yet they have increasingly become the norm amongJackboot JohnsonÕs Yellowshirts once known as the British police.This was the theme all over the world with police savagery commonduring lockdown protests in the United States, the Netherlands, andthe fascist state of Victoria in Australia under its tyrannical andagain moronic premier Daniel Andrews. Amazing how tyrannicaland moronic tend to work as a team and the same combinationcould be seen across America as arrogant, narcissistic Wokegovernors and mayors such as Gavin Newsom (California), AndrewCuomo (New York), Gretchen Whitmer (Michigan), Lori Lightfoot(Chicago) and Eric Garceimpressions with the full support of the compliant brutality of theirenforcers in uniform as they arrested small business owners defyingfascist shutdown orders and took them to jail in ankle shackles andhandcu.s. This happened to bistro owner Marlena Pavlos-Hackneyin Gretchen WhitmerÕs fascist state of Michigan when police arrivedto enforce an order by a state-owned judge for Ôpucommunity at riskÕ at a time when other states like Texas weredropping restrictions and migrants were pouring across thesouthern border without any ÔCovidÕ questions at all. IÕm sure thereare many o.cers appalled by what they are ordered to do, but notnearly enough of them. If they were truly appalled they would notdo it. As the months passed every opportunity was taken to have themilitary involved to make their presence on the streets ever morefamiliar and ÔnormalÕ for the longer-term goal of police-militaryfusion.
Another crucial element to the Hunger Games enforcementnetwork has been encouraging the public to report neighbours andothers for Ôbreaking the lockdown rulesÕ. The group faced with£11,000 in Þnes at the childÕs birthday party would have beendobbed-in by a neighbour with a brain the size of a pea. Thetechnique was most famously employed by the Stasi secret police incommunist East Germany who had public informants placedthroughout the population. A police chief in the UK says his forcedoesnÕt need to carry out ÔCovidÕ patrols when they are ßooded withso many calls from the public reporting other people for visiting thebeach. Dorset police chief James Vaughan said people were soenthusiastic about snitching on their fellow humans they were nowoperating as an auxiliary arm of the police: ÔWe are still gearound 400 reports a week from the public, so we will respond toreports ÉWe wonÕt need to be doing hotspot patrols because peopleare very quick to pick the phone up and tell us.Õ Vaughan didnÕt saythat this is a pillar of all tyrannies of whatever complexion and themeans to hugely extend the reach of enforcement while spreadingdistrust among the people and making them wary of doing anythingthat might get them reported. Those narcissistic Isle of Wightsergeants Radford and Wilkinson never fail to add a link to theirFacebook posts where the public can inform on their fellow slaves.
Neither would be self-aware enough to realise they were imitatingthe Stasi which they might well never have heard of. Governmentpsychologists that I will expose later laid out a policy to turncommunities against each other in the same way.
A coincidence? Yep, and I can knit fog 
I knew from the start of the alleged pandemic that this was a Cultoperation. It presented limitless potential to rapidly advance the Cultagenda and exploit manipulated fear to demand that every man,woman and child on the planet was ÔvaccinatedÕ in a process neverused on humans before which infuses self-replicating synthetic material into human cells. Remember the plan to transform thehuman body from a biological to a synthetic biological state. IÕll dealwith the ÔvaccineÕ (thatÕs not actually a vaccine) when I focus on thegenetic agenda. Enough to say here that mass global ÔvaccinationÕjustiÞed by this Ônew virusÕ set alarms ringing aer 30 years oftracking these people and their methods. The ÔCovidÕ hoax o.ciallybeginning in China was also a big red ßag for reasons I will beexplaining. The agenda potential was so enormous that I coulddismiss any idea that the ÔvirusÕ appeared naturally. Majorhappenings with major agenda implications never occur withoutCult involvement in making them happen. My questions weretwofold in early 2020 as the media began its campaign to induceglobal fear and hysteria: Was this alleged infectious agent releasedon purpose by the Cult or did it even exist at all? I then did what Ialways do in these situations. I sat, observed and waited to seewhere the evidence and information would take me. By March andearly April synchronicity was strongly Ð and ever more so since then
Ð pointing me in the direction of there is no ÔvirusÕ. I went public onthat with derision even from swathes of the alternative media thatvoiced a scenario that the Chinese government released the ÔvirusÕ inleague with Deep State elements in the United States from a top-level bio-lab in Wuhan where the ÔvirusÕ is said to have Þrstappeared. I looked at that possibility, but I didnÕt buy it for severalreasons. Deaths from the ÔvirusÕ did not in any way match what theywould have been with a Ôdeadly bioweaponÕ and it is much moree.ective if you sell the illusion of an infectious agent rather thanhaving a real one unless you can control through injection who has itand who doesnÕt. Otherwise you lose control of events. A made-upÔvirusÕ gives you a blank sheet of paper on which you can make it dowhatever you like and have any symptoms or mutant ÔvariantsÕ youchoose to add while a real infectious agent would limit you to whatit actually does. A phantom disease allows you to have endlessludicrous ÔstudiesÕ on the ÔCovidÕ dollar to widen the perceivedimpact by inventing ever more Ôat riskÕ groups including one studywhich said those who walk slowly may be almost four times morelikely to die from the ÔvirusÕ. People are in psychiatric wards for less.
A real Ôdeadly bioweaponÕ can take out people in the hierarchythat are not part of the Cult, but essential to its operation. Obviouslythey donÕt want that. Releasing a real disease means youimmediately lose control of it. Releasing an illusory one means youdonÕt. Again itÕs vital that people are extra careful when dealing withwhat they want to hear. A bioweapon unleashed from a Chineselaboratory in collusion with the American Deep State may Þt aconspiracy narrative, but is it true? Would it not be far more e.ectiveto use the excuse of a ÔvirusÕ to justify the real bioweapon Ð theÔvaccineÕ? That way your disease agent does not have to betransmies directly through a syringe. I saw a Frenchvirologist Luc Montagnier quoted in the alternative media as sayinghe had discovered that the alleged ÔnewÕ severe acute respiratorysyndrome coronavirus , or SARS-CoV-2, was made artiÞcially andincluded elements of the human immunodeÞciency ÔvirusÕ (HIV)and a parasite that causes malaria. SARS-CoV-2 is alleged to triggeran alleged illness called Covid-19. I remembered MontagnierÕs namefrom my research years before into claims that an HIV ÔretrovirusÕcauses AIDs Ð claims that were demolished by Berkeley virologistPeter Duesberg who showed that no one had ever proved that HIVcauses acquired immunodeÞciency syndrome or AIDS. Claims thatbecome accepted as fact, publicly and medically, with no proofwhatsoever are an ever-recurring story that profoundly applies toÔCovidÕ. Nevertheless, despite the lack of proof, MontagnierÕs teamat the Pasteur Institute in Paris had a long dispute with Americanresearcher Robert Gallo over which of them discovered and isolatedthe HIV ÔvirusÕ and with no evidence found it to cause AIDS. You willsee later that there is also no evidence that any ÔvirusÕ causes anydisease or that there is even such a thing as a ÔvirusÕ in the way it issaid to exist. The claim to have ÔisolatedÕ the HIV ÔvirusÕ will bepresented in its real context as we come to the shocking story Ð andit is a story Ð of SARS-CoV-2 and so will MontagnierÕs assertion thathe identiÞed the full SARS-CoV-2 genome.
Hoax in the making 
We can pick up the ÔCovidÕ story in 2010 and the publication by theRockefeller Foundation of a document called ÔScenarios for theFuture of Technology and International DevelopmentÕ. The innercircle of the Rockefeller family has been serving the Cult since John
D. Rockefeller (1839-1937) made his fortune with Standard Oil. It isless well known that the same Rockefeller Ð the Bill Gates of his day
Ð was responsible for establishing what is now referred to as ÔBigPharmaÕ, the global network of pharmaceutical companies that makeoutrageous proÞts dispensing scalpel and drug ÔmedicineÕ and areobsessed with pumping vaccines in ever-increasing number into asmany human arms and backsides as possible. John D. Rockefellerwas the driving force behind the creation of the ÔeducationÕ systemin the United States and elsewhere speciÞcally designed to programthe perceptions of generations thereaer. The Rockefeller familydonated exceptionally valuable land in New York for the UnitedNations building and were central in establishing the World HealthOrganization in 1948 as an agency of the UN which was createdfrom the start as a Trojan horse and stalking horse for worldgovernment. Now enter Bill Gates. His family and the Rockefellershave long been extremely close and I have seen genealogy whichclaims that if you go back far enough the two families fuse into thesame bloodline. Gates has said that the Bill and Melinda GatesFoundation was inspired by the Rockefeller Foundation and why notwhen both are serving the same Cult? Major tax-exempt foundationsare overwhelmingly criminal enterprises in which Cult assets fundthe Cult agenda in the guise of ÔphilanthropyÕ while avoiding tax inthe process. Cult operatives can become mega-rich in their role offront men and women for the psychopaths at the inner core andthey, too, have to be psychopaths to knowingly serve such evil. Partof the deal is that a big percentage of the wealth gleaned fromrepresenting the Cult has to be spent advancing the ambitions of theCult and hence you have the Rockefeller Foundation, Bill andMelinda Gates Foundation (and so many more) and people likeGeorge Soros with his global Open Society Foundations spendingtheir billions in pursuit of global Cult control. Gates is a globalpublic face of the Cult with his interventions in world a.airsincluding Big Tech inßuence; a central role in the ÔCovidÕ andÔvaccineÕ scam; promotion of the climate change shakedown;manipulation of education; geoengineering of the skies; and hisfood-control agenda as the biggest owner of farmland in America,his GMO promotion and through other means. As one writer said:ÔGates monopolizes or wields disproportionate inßuence over thetech industry, global health and vaccines, agriculture and food policy(including biopiracy and fake food), weather modiÞcation and otherclimate technologies, surveillance, education and media.Õ The almostlimitless wealth secured through Microso and other not-allowed.to-fail ventures (including vaccines) has been ploughed into a long,long list of Cult projects designed to enslave the entire human race.Gates and the Rockefellers have been working as one unit with theRockefeller-established World Health Organization leading globalÔCovidÕ policy controlled by Gates through his mouth-piece Tedros.Gates became the WHOÕs biggest funder when Trump announcedthat the American government would cease its donations, but Bidenimmediately said he would restore the money when he took o.ce inJanuary, 2021. The Gates Foundation (the Cult) owns throughlimitless funding the world health system and the major playersacross the globe in the ÔCovidÕ hoax.
Okay, with that background we return to that RockefellerFoundation document of 2010 headed ÔScenarios for the Future ofTechnology and International DevelopmentÕ and its ÔimaginaryÕepidemic of a virulent and deadly inßuenza strain which infected 20percent of the global population and killed eight million in sevenmonths. The Rockefeller scenario was that the epidemic destroyedeconomies, closed shops, o.ces and other businesses and led togovernments imposing Þerce rules and restrictions that includedmandatory wearing of face masks and body-temperature checks toenter communal spaces like railway stations and supermarkets. Thedocument predicted that even aer the height of the Rockefeller-envisaged epidemic the authoritarian rule would continue to dealwith further pandemics, transnational terrorism, environmentalcrises and rising poverty. Now you may think that the Rockefellersare our modern-day seers or alternatively, and rather more likely,that they well knew what was planned a few years further on.Fascism had to be imposed, you see, to Ôprotect citizens from riskand exposureÕ. The Rockefeller scenario document said:
During the pandemic, national leaders around the world flexed their authority and imposed airtight rules and restrictions, from the mandatory wearing of face masks to body-temperature checks at the entries to communal spaces like train stations and supermarkets. Even after the pandemic faded, this more authoritarian control and oversight of citizens and their activities stuck and even intensified. In order to protect themselves from the spread of increasingly global problems Ð from pandemics and transnational terrorism to environmental crises and rising poverty Ð leaders around the world took a firmer grip on power. 
At first, the notion of a more controlled world gained wide acceptance and approval. Citizens willingly gave up some of their sovereignty Ð and their privacy Ð to more paternalistic states in exchange for greater safety and stability. Citizens were more tolerant, and even eager, for top-down direction and oversight, and national leaders had more latitude to impose order in the ways they saw fit. 
In developed countries, this heightened oversight took many forms: biometric IDs for all citizens, for example, and tighter regulation of key industries whose stability was deemed vital to national interests. In many developed countries, enforced cooperation with a suite of new regulations and agreements slowly but steadily restored both order and, importantly, economic growth. 
There we have the prophetic Rockefellers in 2010 and three yearslater came their paper for the Global Health Summit in Be.ing,China, when government representatives, the private sector,international organisations and groups met to discuss the next 100years of Ôglobal healthÕ. The Rockefeller Foundation-funded paperwas called ÔDreaming the Future of Health for the Next 100 Yearsand more prophecy ensued as it described a dystopian future: ÔTheabundance of data, digitally tracking and linking people may meanthe Ôdeath of privacyÕ and may replace physical interaction withtransient, virtual connection, generating isolation and raisingquestions of how values are shaped in virtual networks.Õ Next in theÔCovidÕ hoax preparation sequence came a Ôtable topÕ simulation in2018 for another ÔimaginaryÕ pandemic of a disease called Clade Xwhich was said to kill 900 million people. The exercise wasorganised by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins UniversityÕs Centerfor Health Security in the United States and this is the very sameuniversity that has been compiling the disgustingly andsystematically erroneous global Þgures for ÔCovidÕ cases and deaths.Similar Johns Hopkins health crisis scenarios have included the DarkWinter exercise in 2001 and Atlantic Storm in 2005.
Nostradamus 201 
For sheer predictive genius look no further prophecy-watchers thanthe Bill Gates-funded Event 201 held only six weeks before theÔcoronavirus pandemicÕ is supposed to have broken out in Chinaand Event 201 was based on a scenario of a global ÔcoronaviruspandemicÕ. Melinda Gates, the great manÕs missus, told the BBC thathe had Ôprepared for yearsÕ for a coronavirus pandemic which toldus what we already knew. Nostradamugates had predicted in a TEDtalk in 2015 that a pandemic was coming that would kill a lot ofpeople and demolish the world economy. My god, the man is amachine Ð possibly even literally. Now here he was only weeksbefore the real thing funding just such a simulated scenario andinvolving his friends and associates at Johns Hopkins, the WorldEconomic Forum Cult-front of Klaus Schwab, the United Nations,Johnson & Johnson, major banks, and o.cials from China and theCenters for Disease Control in the United States. What synchronicity
Ð
 Johns Hopkins would go on to compile the fraudulent ÔCovidÕÞgures, the World Economic Forum and Schwab would push theÔGreat ResetÕ in response to ÔCovidÕ, the Centers for Disease Controlwould be at the forefront of ÔCovidÕ policy in the United States,Johnson & Johnson would produce a ÔCovid vaccineÕ, andeverything would o.cially start just weeks later in China. Spooky,eh? They were even accurate in creating a simulation of a ÔvirusÕpandemic because the Ôreal thingÕ would also be a simulation. Event201 was not an exercise preparing for something that might happen;it was a rehearsal for what those in control knew was going tohappen and very shortly. Hours of this simulation were posted onthe Internet and the various themes and responses mirrored whatwould soon be imposed to transform human society. News storieswere inserted and what they said would be commonplace a fewweeks later with still more prophecy perfection. Much discussionfocused on the need to deal with misinformation and the Ôanti-vaxmovementÕ which is exactly what happened when the ÔvirusÕ arrived

Ð
 was said to have arrived Ð in the West.Cult-owned social media banned criticism and exposure of theo.cial ÔvirusÕ narrative and when I said there was no ÔvirusÕ in earlyApril, 2020, I was banned by one platform aer another includingYouTube, Facebook and later Twi. The mainstream broadcastmedia in Britain was in e.ect banned from interviewing me by theTony-Blair-created government broadcasting censor Ofcom headedby career government bureaucrat Melanie Dawes who wasappointed just as the ÔvirusÕ hoax was about to play out in January,2020. At the same time the Ickonic media platform was using Vimeo,another ultra-Zionist-owned operation, while our own player wasbeing created and they deleted in an instant hundreds of videos,documentaries, series and shows to conÞrm their unbelievablevindictiveness. We had copies, of course, and they had to be restored


one by one when our player was ready. These people have no class.Sabbatian Facebook promised free advertisements for the Gates.controlled World Health Organization narrative while deleting Ôfalseclaims and conspiracy theoriesÕ to stop ÔmisinformationÕ about thealleged coronavirus. All these responses could be seen just a shortwhile earlier in the scenarios of Event 201. Extreme censorship wasabsolutely crucial for the Cult because the o.cial story was soridiculous and unsupportable by the evidence that it could neversurvive open debate and the free-ßow of information and opinion. Ifyou canÕt win a debate then donÕt have one is the CultÕs approachthroughout history. FacebookÕs liMark Zuckerberg equated Ôcredible and accurate informationÕ witho.cial sources and exposing their lies with ÔmisinformationÕ.
Silencing those that can see 
The censorship dynamic of Event 201 is now the norm with an armyof narrative-supporting Ôfact-checkerÕ organisations whose entirereason for being is to tell the public that o.cial narratives are trueand those exposing them are lying. One of the most appalling ofthese Ôfact-checkersÕ is called NewsGuard founded by ultra-ZionistAmericans Gordon Crovitz and Steven Brill. Crovitz is a formerpublisher of The Wall Street Journal, former Executive Vice Presidentof Dow Jones, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR),and on the board of the American Association of Rhodes Scholars.The CFR and Rhodes Scholarships, named aer Rothschild agentCecil Rhodes who plundered the gold and diamonds of South Africafor his masters and the Cult, have featured widely in my books.NewsGuard donÕt seem to like me for some reason Ð I really canÕtthink why Ð and they have done all they can to have me censoredand discredited which is, to quote an old British politician, like beingsavaged by a dead sheep. They are, however, like all in thecensorship network, very well connected and funded byorganisations themselves funded by, or connected to, Bill Gates. Asyou would expect with anything associated with Gates NewsGuardhas an o.shoot called HealthGuard which ÔÞghts online health carehoaxesÕ. How very kind. Somehow the NewsGuard EuropeanManaging Director Anna-Sophie Harling, a remarkably young.looking woman with no broadcasting experience and liwork in journalism, has somehow secured a position on the ÔContentBoardÕ of UK government broadcast censor Ofcom. An executive ofan organisation seeking to discredit dissidents of the o.cialnarratives is making decisions for the government broadcastÔregulatorÕ about content?? Another appalling Ôfact-checkerÕ is FullFact funded by George Soros and global censors Google andFacebook.
ItÕs amazing how many activists in the Ôfact-checkingÕ, Ôanti-hateÕ,arena turn up in government-related positions Ð people like UKLabour Party activist Imran Ahmed who heads the Center forCountering Digital Hate founded by people like MorganMcSweeney, now chief of sta. to the Labour PartyÕs hapless anduseless ÔleaderÕ Keir Starmer. Digital Hate Ð which is what it really is
Ð uses the American spelling of Center to betray its connection to atransatlantic network of similar organisations which in 2020shapeshied from aquestioning the ÔCovidÕ hoax and the dangers of the ÔCovid vaccineÕ.ItÕs just a coincidence, you understand. This is one of Imran AhmedÕshysterical statements: ÔI would go beyond calling anti-vaxxersconspiracy theorists to say they are an extremist group that pose anational security risk.Õ No one could ever accuse this prat ofunderstatement and heÕs including in that those parents who arenow against vaccines aer their children were damaged for life orkilled by them. HeÕs such a nice man. Ahmed does the rounds of theWoke media gewho never ask what right he has to campaign to destroy the freedomof speech of others while he demands it for himself. There alsoseems to be an overrepresentation in Ofcom of people connected tothe narrative-worshipping BBC. This incredible global network ofnarrative-support was super-vital when the ÔCovidÕ hoax was playedin the light of the mega-whopper lies that have to be defended fromthe spotlight cast by the most basic intelligence.
Setting the scene 
The Cult plays the long game and proceeds step-by-step ensuringthat everything is in place before major cards are played and theydonÕt come any bigger than the ÔCovidÕ hoax. The psychopaths canÕthandle events where the outcome isnÕt certain and as lipossible Ð preferably nothing Ð is le to chance. Politicians,government and medical o.cials who would follow direction werebrought to illusory power in advance by the Cult web whether onthe national stage or others like state governors and mayors ofAmerica. For decades the dynamic between o.cialdom, lawenforcement and the public was changed from one of service to oneof control and dictatorship. Behaviour manipulation networksestablished within government were waiting to impose the comingÔCovidÕ rules and regulations speciÞcally designed to subdue andrewire the psyche of the people in the guise of protecting health.These included in the UK the Behavioural Insights Team part-ownedby the British government Cabinet O.ce; the ScientiÞc PandemicInsights Group on Behaviours (SPI-B); and a whole web ofintelligence and military groups seeking to direct the conversationon social media and control the narrative. Among them are thecyberwarfare (on the people) 77th Brigade of the British militarywhich is also coordinated through the Cabinet O.ce as civilian andmilitary leadership continues to combine in what they call theFusion Doctrine. The 77th Brigade is a British equivalent of theinfamous Israeli (Sabbatian) military cyberwarfare and Internetmanipulation operation Unit 8200 which I expose at length in The Trigger. Also carefully in place were the medical and science advisersto government Ð many on the payroll past or present of Bill Gates Ðand a whole alternative structure of unelected government stood byto take control when elected parliaments were e.ectively closeddown once the ÔCovidÕ card was slammed on the table. The structureI have described here and so much more was installed in everymajor country through the Cult networks. The top-down controlhierarchy looks like this: The Cult Ð Cult-owned Gates Ð the WorldHealth Organization and Tedros Ð Gates-funded or controlled chiefmedical o.cers and science ÔadvisersÕ (dictators) in each country Ðpolitical ÔleadersÕÐ law enforcement Ð The People. Through thissimple global communication and enforcement structure the policyof the Cult could be imposed on virtually the entire humanpopulation so long as they acquiesced to the fascism. Witheverything in place it was time for the bu2019/early 2020.
These were the prime goals the Cult had to secure for its will toprevail:
1) Locking down economies, closing all but designated ÔessentialÕ businesses (Cult-ownedcorporations were ÔessentialÕ), and puas animperative to destroy independent income and employment and ensure dependency on theCult-controlled state in the Hunger Games Society. Lockdowns had to be established as theglobal blueprint from the start to respond to the ÔvirusÕ and followed by preentire world.
2) The global population had to be terriÞed into believing in a deadly ÔvirusÕ that didnÕtactually exist so they would unquestioningly obey authority in the belief that authoritymust know how best to protect them and their families. Soware salesman Gates wouldsuddenly morph into the worldÕs health expert and be promoted as such by the Cult-ownedmedia.
3) A method of testing that wasnÕt testing for the ÔvirusÕ, but was only claimed to be, had tobe in place to provide the illusion of ÔcasesÕ and subsequent ÔdeathsÕ that had a verydi.erent cause to the ÔCovid-19Õ that would be scribbled on the death certiÞcate.
4) Because there was no ÔvirusÕ and the great majority testing positive with a test not testingfor the ÔvirusÕ would have no symptoms of anything the lie had to be sold that peoplewithout symptoms (without the ÔvirusÕ) could still pass it on to others. This was crucial tojustify for the Þrst time quarantining Ð house arresting Ð healthy people. Without this theeconomy-destroying lockdown of everybody could not have been credibly sold.
5) The ÔsaviourÕ had to be seen as a vaccine which beyond evil drug companies wereworking like angels of mercy to develop as quickly as possible, with all corners cut, to savethe day. The public must absolutely not know that the ÔvaccineÕ had nothing to do with aÔvirusÕ or that the contents were ready and waiting with a very di.erent motive long beforethe ÔCovidÕ card was even lied from the pack.
I said in March, 2020, that the ÔvaccineÕ would have been createdway ahead of the ÔCovidÕ hoax which justiÞed its use and thefollowing December an article in the New York Intelligencer magazine said the Moderna ÔvaccineÕ had been ÔdesignedÕ byJanuary, 2020. This was Ôbefore China had even acknowledged thatthe disease could be transmiweek before the Þrst conÞrmed coronavirus case in the UnitedStatesÕ. The article said that by the time the Þrst American death wasannounced a month later Ôthe vaccine had already beenmanufactured and shipped to the National Institutes of Health forthe beginning of its Phase I clinical trialÕ. The ÔvaccineÕ was actuallyÔdesignedÕ long before that although even with this timescale youwould expect the article to ask how on earth it could have been donethat quickly. Instead it asked why the ÔvaccineÕ had not been rolledout then and not months later. Journalism in the mainstream is trulydead. I am going to detail in the next chapter why the ÔvirusÕ hasnever existed and how a hoax on that scale was possible, but Þrst thefoundation on which the Big Lie of ÔCovidÕ was built.
The test that doesnÕt test 
Fraudulent ÔtestingÕ is the bowas the means by which a ÔvirusÕ that did not exist appeared to exist.They could only achieve this magic trick by using a test not testingfor the ÔvirusÕ. To use a test that was testing for the ÔvirusÕ wouldmean that every test would come back negative given there was noÔvirusÕ. They chose to exploit something called the RT-PCR testinvented by American biochemist Kary Mullis in the 1980s who saidpublicly that his PCR test É cannot detect infectious disease. Yes, theÔtestÕ used worldwide to detect infectious ÔCovidÕ to produce all theillusory ÔcasesÕ and ÔdeathsÕ compiled by Johns Hopkins and otherscannot detect infectious disease. This fact came from the mouth of theman who invented PCR and was awarded the Nobel Prize inChemistry in 1993 for doing so. Sadly, and incredibly convenientlyfor the Cult, Mullis died in August, 2019, at the age of 74 just beforehis test would be fraudulently used to unleash fascism on the world.He was said to have died from pneumonia which was an irony initself. A few months later he would have had ÔCovid-19Õ on his deathcertiÞcate. I say the timing of his death was convenient because hadhe lived Mullis, a brilliant, honest and decent man, would have beenvociferously speaking out against the use of his test to detect ÔCovidÕwhen it was never designed, or able, to do that. I know that to betrue given that Mullis made the same point when his test was usedto ÔdetectÕ Ð not detect Ð HIV. He had been seriously critical of theGallo/Montagnier claim to have isolated the HIV ÔvirusÕ and shownit to cause AIDS for which Mullis said there was no evidence. AIDSis actually not a disease but a series of diseases from which peopledie all the time. When they die from those same diseases aer apositive ÔtestÕ for HIV then AIDS goes on their death certiÞcate. Ithink IÕve heard that before somewhere. Countries instigated apolicy with ÔCovidÕ that anyone who tested positive with a test nottesting for the ÔvirusÕ and died of any other cause within 28 days andeven longer ÔCovid-19Õ had to go on the death certiÞcate. Cases havecome from the test that canÕt test for infectious disease and thedeaths are those who have died of anything aer testing positivewith a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ. IÕll have much more later aboutthe death certiÞcate scandal.
Mullis was deeply dismissive of the now US ÔCovidÕ star AnthonyFauci who he said was a liar who didnÕt know anything aboutanything Ð Ôand I would say that to his face Ð nothing.Õ He said ofFauci: ÔThe man thinks he can take a blood sample, put it in anelectron microscope and if itÕs got a virus in there youÕll know it Ð hedoesnÕt understand electron microscopy and he doesnÕt understandmedicine and shouldnÕt be in a position like heÕs in.Õ That position,terrifyingly, has made him the decider of ÔCovidÕ fascism policy onbehalf of the Cult in his role as director since 1984 of the NationalInstitute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) while his recordof being wrong is laughable; but being wrong, so long as itÕs the right kind of wrong, is why the Cult loves him. HeÕll say anything the Culttells him to say. Fauci was made Chief Medical Adviser to thePresident immediately Biden took o.ce. Biden was installed in theWhite House by Cult manipulation and one of his Þrst decisions wasto elevate Fauci to a position of even more control. This is acoincidence? Yes, and I identify as a ßamenco dancer called Lola.How does such an incompetent criminal like Fauci remain in thatpivotal position in American health since the 1980s? When you servethe Cult it looks aer you until you are surplus to requirements.Kary Mullis said prophetically of Fauci and his like: ÔThose guyshave an agenda and itÕs not an agenda we would like them to haveÉ they make their own rules, they change them when they want to,and Tony Fauci does not mind going on television in front of thepeople who pay his salary and lie directly into the camera.Õ Fauci hasdone that almost daily since the ÔCovidÕ hoax began. Lying is inFauciÕs DNA. To make the situation crystal clear about the PCR testthis is a direct quote from its inventor Kary Mullis:
It [the PCR test] doesnÕt tell you that youÕre sick and doesnÕt tell you that the thing you ended up with was really going to hurt you ...Õ 
Ask yourself why governments and medical systems the world overhave been using this very test to decide who is ÔinfectedÕ with theSARS-CoV-2 ÔvirusÕ and the alleged disease it allegedly causes,ÔCovid-19Õ. The answer to that question will tell you what has beengoing on. By the way, hereÕs a li.CoV-2 ÔvirusÕ was ÔidentiÞedÕ as such right from the start using É the PCR test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ. If you are new to this and Þnd thatshocking then stick around. I have hardly started yet. Even worse,other ÔtestsÕ, like the ÔLateral Flow DeviceÕ (LFD), are considered souseless that they have to be confirmed by the PCR test! Leaked emailswriHancock, said they were Ôdangerously unreliableÕ. Dyson, executivedirector of strategy at the Department of Health, wrote: ÔAs of today,someone who gets a positive LFD result in (say) London has at best a25 per cent chance of it being a true positive, but if it is a self-reported test potentially as low as 10 per cent (on an optimisticassumption about speciÞcity) or as low as 2 per cent (on a morepessimistic assumption).Õ These are the ÔtestsÕ that schoolchildrenand the public are being urged to have twice a week or more andhave to isolate if they get a positive. Each fake positive goes in thestatistics as a ÔcaseÕ no maÔcasesÕ drive lockdown, masks and the pressure to ÔvaccinateÕ. Thegovernment said in response to the email leak that the ÔtestsÕ wereaccurate which conÞrmed yet again what shocking bloody liars theyare. The real false positive rate is 100 percent as weÕll see. In anotherÔyou couldnÕt make it upÕ the UK government agreed to pay £2.8billion to CaliforniaÕs Innova Medical Group to supply the irrelevantlateral ßow tests. The companyÕs primary test-making centre is inChina. Innova Medical Group, established in March, 2020, is ownedby Pasaca Capital Inc, chaired by Chinese-American millionaireCharles Huang who was born in Wuhan.
How it works Ð and how it doesnÕt 
The RT-PCR test, known by its full title of Polymerase chain reaction,is used across the world to make millions, even billions, of copies ofa DNA/RNA genetic information sample. The process is calledÔampliÞcationÕ and means that a tiny sample of genetic material isampliÞed to bring out the detailed content. I stress that it is nottesting for an infectious disease. It is simply amplifying a sample ofgenetic material. In the words of Kary Mullis: ÔPCR is É just aprocess thatÕs used to make a whole lot of something out ofsomething.Õ To emphasise the point companies that make the PCRtests circulated around the world to ÔtestÕ for ÔCovidÕ warn on thebox that it canÕt be used to detect ÔCovidÕ or infectious disease and isfor research purposes only. ItÕs okay, rest for a minute and youÕll beÞne. This is the test that produces the ÔcasesÕ and ÔdeathsÕ that havebeen used to destroy human society. All those global and nationalmedical and scientiÞc ÔexpertsÕ demanding this destruction to ÔsaveusÕ KNOW that the test is not testing for the ÔvirusÕ and the cases anddeaths they claim to be real are an almost unimaginable fraud. Everyone of them and so many others including politicians andpsychopaths like Gates and Tedros must be brought beforeNuremburg-type trials and jailed for the rest of their lives. The morethe genetic sample is ampliÞed by PCR the more elements of thatmaterial become sensitive to the test and by that I donÕt meansensitive for a ÔvirusÕ but for elements of the genetic material whichis naturally in the body or relates to remnants of old conditions ofvarious kinds lying dormant and causing no disease. Once theampliÞcation of the PCR reaches a certain level everyone will testpositive. So much of the material has been made sensitive to the testthat everyone will have some part of it in their body. Even lyingcriminals like Fauci have said that once PCR ampliÞcations pass 35cycles everything will be a false positive that cannot be trusted forthe reasons I have described. I say, like many proper doctors andscientists, that 100 percent of the ÔpositivesÕ are false, but letÕs just gowith Fauci for a moment.
He says that any ampliÞcation over 35 cycles will produce falsepositives and yet the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) andFood and Drug Administration (FDA) have recommended up to 40 cycles and the National Health Service (NHS) in Britain admian internal document for sta. that it was using 45 cycles ofampliÞcation. A long list of other countries has been doing the sameand at least one ÔtestingÕ laboratory has been using 50 cycles. Haveyou ever heard a doctor, medical ÔexpertÕ or the media ask what levelof ampliÞcation has been used to claim a ÔpositiveÕ. The ÔtestÕ comesback ÔpositiveÕ and so you have the ÔvirusÕ, end of story. Now we cansee how the government in Tanzania could send o. samples from agoat and a pawpaw fruit under human names and both came backpositive for ÔCovid-19Õ. Tanzania president John Magufuli mockedthe ÔCovidÕ hysteria, the PCR test and masks and refused to importthe DNA-manipulating ÔvaccineÕ. The Cult hated him and an articlesponsored by the Bill Gates Foundation appeared in the LondonGuardian in February, 2021, headed ÔItÕs time for Africa to rein inTanzaniaÕs anti-vaxxer presidentÕ. Well, Ôreined inÕ he shortly was.Magufuli appeared in good health, but then, in March, 2021, he wasdead at 61 from Ôheart failureÕ. He was replaced by Samia HassanSuhulu who is connected to Klaus SchwabÕs World Economic Forumand she immediately reversed MagufuliÕs ÔCovidÕ policy. A sample ofcola tested positive for ÔCovidÕ with the PCR test in Germany whileAmerican actress and singer-songwriter Erykah Badu tested positivein one nostril and negative in the other. Footballer Ronaldo calledthe PCR test ÔbullshitÕ aer testing positive three times and beingforced to quarantine and miss matches when there was nothingwrong with him. The mantra from Tedros at the World HealthOrganization and national governments (same thing) has been test,test, test. They know that the more tests they can generate the morefake ÔcasesÕ they have which go on to become ÔdeathsÕ in ways I amcoming to. The UK government has its Operation Moonshot plannedto test multiple millions every day in workplaces and schools withfree tests for everyone to use twice a week at home in line with theCult plan from the start to make testing part of life. A governmentadvertisement for an ÔInterim Head of Asymptomatic TestingCommunicationÕ said the job included responsibility for delivering aÔcommunications strategyÕ (propaganda) Ôto support the expansionof asymptomatic testing that Ônormalises testing as part of everyday lifeÕ.More tests means more fake ÔcasesÕ, ÔdeathsÕ and fascism. I haveheard of, and from, many people who booked a test, couldnÕt turnup, and yet got a positive result through the post for a test theyÕdnever even had. The whole thing is crazy, but for the Cult thereÕsmethod in the madness. Controlling and manipulating the level ofampliÞcation of the test means the authorities can control wheneverthey want the number of apparent ÔcasesÕ and ÔdeathsÕ. If they wantto justify more fascist lockdown and destruction of livelihoods theykeep the ampliÞcation high. If they want to give the illusion thatlockdowns and the ÔvaccineÕ are working then they lower theampliÞcation and ÔcasesÕ and ÔdeathsÕ will appear to fall. In January,2021, the Cult-owned World Health Organization suddenly warnedlaboratories about over-ampliÞcation of the test and to lower thethreshold. Suddenly headlines began appearing such as: ÔWhy AREÒCovidÓ cases plummeting?Õ This was just when the vaccine rolloutwas underway and I had predicted months before they would makecases appear to fall through ampliÞcation tampering when theÔvaccineÕ came. These people are so predictable.
Cow vaccines? 
The question must be asked of what is on the test swabs being pokedfar up the nose of the population to the base of the brain? A nasalswab punctured one womanÕs brain and caused it to leak ßuid. Mostof these procedures are being done by people with limedical knowledge. Dr Lorraine Day, former orthopaedic traumasurgeon and Chief of Orthopaedic Surgery at San Francisco GeneralHospital, says the tests are really a ÔvaccineÕ. Cows have long beenvaccinated this way. She points out that masks have to cover the noseand the mouth where it is claimed the ÔvirusÕ exists in saliva. Whythen donÕt they take saliva from the mouth as they do with a DNAtest instead of pushing a long swab up the nose towards the brain?The ethmoid bone separates the nasal cavity from the brain andwithin that bone is the cribriform plate. Dr Day says that when theswab is pushed up against this plate and twisted the procedure isÔdepositing things back thereÕ. She claims that among these ÔthingsÕare nanoparticles that can enter the brain. Researchers have notedthat a team at the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins have designed tiny,star-shaped micro-devices that can latch onto intestinal mucosa andrelease drugs into the body. Mucosa is the thin skin that covers theinside surface of parts of the body such as the nose and mouth andproduces mucus to protect them. The Johns Hopkins micro-devicesare called ÔtheragrippersÕ and were ÔinspiredÕ by a parasitic wormthat digs its sharp teeth into a hostÕs intestines. Nasal swabs are alsocoated in the sterilisation agent ethylene oxide. The US NationalCancer Institute posts this explanation on its website:
At room temperature, ethylene oxide is a flammable colorless gas with a sweet odor. It is used primarily to produce other chemicals, including antifreeze. In smaller amounts, ethylene oxide is used as a pesticide and a sterilizing agent. The ability of ethylene oxide to damage DNA makes it an effective sterilizing agent but also accounts for its cancer-causing activity. 
The Institute mentions lymphoma and leukaemia as cancers mostfrequently reported to be associated with occupational exposure toethylene oxide along with stomach and breast cancers. How doesanyone think this is going to work out with the constant testingregime being inßicted on adults and children at home and at schoolthat will accumulate in the body anything thatÕs on the swab?
Doctors know best 
It is vital for people to realise that ÔheroÕ doctors ÔknowÕ only whatthe Big Pharma-dominated medical authorities tell them to ÔknowÕand if they refuse to ÔknowÕ what they are told to ÔknowÕ they are outthe door. They are mostly not physicians or healers, but repeaters ofthe o.cial narrative Ð or else. I have seen alleged professionaldoctors on British television make shocking statements that we aresupposed to take seriously. One called ÔDrÕ Amir Khan, who isactually telling patients how to respond to illness, said that mencould take the birth pill to Ôhelp slow down the e.ects of Covid-19Õ.In March, 2021, another ridiculous ÔCovid studyÕ by an Americandoctor proposed injecting men with the female sex hormoneprogesterone as a ÔCovidÕ treatment. British doctor Nighat Arif toldthe BBC that face coverings were now going to be part of ongoingnormal. Yes, the vaccine protects you, she said (evidence?) É but theway to deal with viruses in the community was always going tocome down to hand washing, face covering and keeping a physicaldistance. ThatÕs not what we were told before the ÔvaccineÕ wascirculating. Arif said she couldnÕt imagine ever again going on theunderground or in a li without a mask. I was just thanking mygood luck that she was not my doctor when she said Ð in March,2021 Ð that if Ôwe are behaving and we are doing all the right thingsÕshe thought we could Ôhave our nearest and dearest around us athome É around Christmas and New Year! Her patronising deliverywas the usual school teacher talking to six-year-olds as she repeatedevery government talking point and probably believed them all. Ifwe have learned anything from the ÔCovidÕ experience surely it mustbe that humanityÕs perception of doctors needs a fundamentalrethink. NHS ÔdoctorÕ Sara Kayat told her television audience thatthe ÔCovid vaccineÕ would Ô100 percent prevent hospitalisation anddeathÕ. Not even Big Pharma claimed that. We have to stop takingÔexpertsÕ at their word without question when so many of them areclueless and only repeating the party line on which their careersdepend. That is not to say there are not brilliants doctors Ð there areand I have spoken to many of them since all this began Ð but youwonÕt see them in the mainstream media or quoted by thepsychopaths and yes-people in government.
Remember the name Ð Christian Drosten 
German virologist Christian Drosten, Director of CharitŽ Institute ofVirology in Berlin, became a national star aer the pandemic hoaxbegan. He was feted on television and advised the Germangovernment on ÔCovidÕ policy. Most importantly to the wider worldDrosten led a group that produced the ÔCovidÕ testing protocol forthe PCR test. What a remarkable feat given the PCR cannot test forinfectious disease and even more so when you think that Drostensaid that his method of testing for SARS-CoV-2 was developedÔwithout having virus material availableÕ. He developed a test for a ÔvirusÕ that he didnÕt have and had never seen. Let that sink in as yousurvey the global devastation that came from what he did. Thewhole catastrophe of DrostenÕs ÔtestÕ was based on the allegedgenetic sequence published by Chinese scientists on the Internet. Wewill see in the next chapter that this alleged Ôgenetic sequenceÕ hasnever been produced by China or anyone and cannot be when thereis no SARS-CoV-2. Drosten, however, doesnÕt seem to let lilike that get in the way. He was the lead author with Victor Cormanfrom the same CharitŽ Hospital of the paper ÔDetection of 2019 novelcoronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time PCRÔ published in a magazinecalled Eurosurveillance. This became known as the Corman-Drostenpaper. In November, 2020, with human society devastated by thee.ects of the Corman-Drosten test baloney, the protocol was publiclychallenged by 22 international scientists and independentresearchers from Europe, the United States, and Japan. Among themwere senior molecular geneticists, biochemists, immunologists, andmicrobiologists. They produced a document headed ÔExternal peerreview of the RTPCR test to detect SARS-Cov-2 Reveals 10 MajorFlaws At The Molecular and Methodological Level: ConsequencesFor False-Positive ResultsÕ. The ßaws in the Corman-Drosten testincluded the following:
¥
The test is non-speciÞc because of erroneous design

¥
Results are enormously variable

¥
The test is unable to discriminate between the whole ÔvirusÕ andviral fragments

¥
It doesnÕt have positive or negative controls

¥
The test lacks a standard operating procedure

¥
It is unsupported by proper peer view


The scientists said the PCR ÔCovidÕ testing protocol was notfounded on science and they demanded the Corman-Drosten paperbe retracted by Eurosurveillance. They said all present and previousCovid deaths, cases, and Ôinfection ratesÕ should be subject to amassive retroactive inquiry. Lockdowns and travel restrictionsshould be reviewed and relaxed and those diagnosed through PCRto have ÔCovid-19Õ should not be forced to isolate. Dr Kevin Corbea health researcher and nurse educator with a long academic careerproducing a stream of peer-reviewed publications at many UKuniversities, made the same point about the PCR test debacle. Hesaid of the scientistsÕ conclusions: ÔEvery scientiÞc rationale for thedevelopment of that test has been totally destroyed by this paper. ItÕslike Hiroshima/Nagasaki to the Covid test.Õ He said that ChinahadnÕt given them an isolated ÔvirusÕ when Drosten developed thetest. Instead they had developed the test from a sequence in a gene bank.Õ Put another way É they made it up! The scientists weresupported in this contention by a Portuguese appeals court whichruled in November, 2020, that PCR tests are unreliable and it isunlawful to quarantine people based solely on a PCR test. The pointabout China not providing an isolated virus must be true when theÔvirusÕ has never been isolated to this day and the consequences ofthat will become clear. Drosten and company produced this uselessÔprotocolÕ right on cue in January, 2020, just as the ÔvirusÕ was said tobe moving westward and it somehow managed to successfully passa peer-review in 24 hours. In other words there was no peer-reviewfor a test that would be used to decide who had ÔCovidÕ and whodidnÕt across the world. The Cult-created, Gates-controlled WorldHealth Organization immediately recommended all its nearly 200member countries to use the Drosten PCR protocol to detect ÔcasesÕand ÔdeathsÕ. The sting was underway and it continues to this day.
So who is this Christian Drosten that produced the means throughwhich death, destruction and economic catastrophe would bejustiÞed? His education background, including his doctoral thesis,would appear to be somewhat shrouded in mystery and his trackrecord is dire as with another essential player in the ÔCovidÕ hoax,the Gates-funded Professor Neil Ferguson at the Gates-fundedImperial College in London of whom more shortly. Drostenpredicted in 2003 that the alleged original SARS ÔvirusÕ (SARS-1Õ)was an epidemic that could have serious e.ects on economies and ane.ective vaccine would take at least two years to produce. DrostenÕsanswer to every alleged ÔoutbreakÕ is a vaccine which you wonÕt beshocked to know. What followed were just 774 o.cial deathsworldwide and none in Germany where there were only nine cases.That is even if you believe there ever was a SARS ÔvirusÕ when theevidence is zilch and I will expand on this in the next chapter.Drosten claims to be co-discoverer of ÔSARS-1Õ and developed a testfor it in 2003. He was screaming warnings about Ôswine ßuÕ in 2009and how it was a widespread infection far more severe than anydangers from a vaccine could be and people should get vaccinated. Itwould be helpful for DrostenÕs vocal chords if he simply recordedthe words Ôthe virus is deadly and you need to get vaccinatedÕ andcopies could be handed out whenever the latest made-up threatcomes along. DrostenÕs swine ßu epidemic never happened, but BigPharma didnÕt mind with governments spending hundreds ofmillions on vaccines that hardly anyone bothered to use and manywho did wished they hadnÕt. A study in 2010 revealed that the riskof dying from swine ßu, or H1N1, was no higher than that of theannual seasonal ßu which is what at least most of ÔitÕ really was as inthe case of ÔCovid-19Õ. A media investigation into Drosten askedhow with such a record of inaccuracy he could be the governmentadviser on these issues. The answer to that question is the same withDrosten, Ferguson and Fauci Ð they keep on giving the authoritiesthe ÔconclusionsÕ and ÔadviceÕ they want to hear. Drosten certainlyproduced the goods for them in January, 2020, with his PCR protocolgarbage and provided the foundation of what German internalmedicine specialist Dr Claus Kšhnlein, co-author of Virus Mania,called the Ôtest pandemicÕ. The 22 scientists in the Eurosurveillance challenge called out conßicts of interest within the Drosten ÔprotocolÕgroup and with good reason. Olfert Landt, a regular co-author ofDrosten ÔstudiesÕ, owns the biotech company TIB MolbiolSyntheselabor GmbH in Berlin which manufactures and sells thetests that Drosten and his mates come up with. They have done thiswith SARS, Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), MERS, Zika ÔvirusÕ,yellow fever, and now ÔCovidÕ. Landt told the Berliner Zeitung newspaper:
The testing, design and development came from the CharitŽ [Drosten and Corman]. We simply implemented it immediately in the form of a kit. And if we donÕt have the virus, which originally only existed in Wuhan, we can make a synthetic gene to simulate the genome of the virus. ThatÕs what we did very quickly. 
This is more conÞrmation that the Drosten test was designedwithout access to the ÔvirusÕ and only a synthetic simulation which iswhat SARS-CoV-2 really is Ð a computer-generated synthetic Þction.ItÕs quite an enterprise they have going here. A Drosten team decideswhat the test for something should be and LandtÕs biotech companyßogs it to governments and medical systems across the world. Hiscompany must have made an absolute fortune since the ÔCovidÕ hoaxbegan. Dr Reiner Fuellmich, a prominent German consumerprotection trial lawyer in Germany and California, is on DrostenÕscase and that of Tedros at the World Health Organization for crimesagainst humanity with a class-action lawsuit being prepared in theUnited States and other legal action in Germany.
Why China? 
Scamming the world with a ÔvirusÕ that doesnÕt exist would seemimpossible on the face of it, but not if you have control of therelatively few people that make policy decisions and the greatmajority of the global media. Remember itÕs not about changingÔrealÕ reality itÕs about controlling perception of reality. You donÕt haveto make something happen you only have make people believe thatitÕs happening. Renegade Minds understand this and are thereforemuch harder to swindle. ÔCovid-19Õ is not a ÔrealÕ ÔvirusÕ. ItÕs a mindvirus, like a computer virus, which has infected the minds, not thebodies, of billions. It all started, publically at least, in China and thatalone is of central signiÞcance. The Cult was behind the revolutionled by its asset Mao Zedong, or Chairman Mao, which establishedthe PeopleÕs Republic of China on October 1st, 1949. It should havebeen called The CultÕs Republic of China, but the name had to reßectthe recurring illusion that vicious dictatorships are run by and forthe people (see all the ÔDemocratic RepublicsÕ controlled by tyrants).In the same way we have the ÔBidenÕ Democratic Republic ofAmerica o.cially ruled by a puppet tyrant (at least temporarily) onbehalf of Cult tyrants. The creation of MaoÕs mercilesscommunist/fascist dictatorship was part of a frenzy of activity by theCult at the conclusion of World War Two which, like the First WorldWar, it had instigated through its assets in Germany, Britain, France,the United States and elsewhere. Israel was formed in 1948; theSoviet Union expanded its ÔIron CurtainÕ control, inßuence andmilitary power with the Warsaw Pact communist alliance in 1955;the United Nations was formed in 1945 as a Cult precursor to worldgovernment; and a long list of world bodies would be establishedincluding the World Health Organization (1948), World TradeOrganization (1948 under another name until 1995), InternationalMonetary Fund (1945) and World Bank (1944). Human society wasredrawn and hugely centralised in the global Problem-Reaction-Solution that was World War Two. All these changes weresigniÞcant. Israel would become the headquarters of the Sabbatiansand the revolution in China would prepare the ground and controlsystem for the events of 2019/2020.
Renegade Minds know there are no borders except for publicconsumption. The Cult is a seamless, borderless global entity and tounderstand the game we need to put aside labels like borders,nations, countries, communism, fascism and democracy. Thesedelude the population into believing that countries are ruled withintheir borders by a government of whatever shade when these aremere agencies of a global power. AmericaÕs illusion of democracyand ChinaÕs communism/fascism are subsidiaries Ð vehicles Ð for thesame agenda. We may hear about conßict and competition betweenAmerica and China and on the lower levels that will be true; but atthe Cult level they are branches of the same company in the way ofthe McDonaldÕs example I gave earlier. I have tracked in the booksover the years support by US governments of both parties forChinese Communist Party inÞltration of American society throughallowing the sale of land, even military facilities, and the acquisitionof American business and university inßuence. All this isunderpinned by the infamous stealing of intellectual property andtechnological know-how. Cult-owned Silicon Valley corporationswaive their fraudulent ÔmoralityÕ to do business with human-rights.free China; Cult-controlled Disney has become ChinaÕs PRdepartment; and China in e.ect owns ÔAmericanÕ sports such asbasketball which depends for much of its income on Chineseaudiences. As a result any sports player, coach or o.cial speakingout against ChinaÕs horriÞc human rights record is immediatelycondemned or Þred by the China-worshipping National BasketballAssociation. One of the Þrst acts of China-controlled Biden was toissue an executive order telling federal agencies to stop makingreferences to the ÔvirusÕ by the Ôgeographic location of its originÕ.Long-time Congressman Jerry Nadler warned that criticising China,AmericaÕs biggest rival, leads to hate crimes against Asian people inthe United States. So shut up you bigot. China is fast closing in onIsrael as a country that must not be criticised which is apt, really,given that Sabbatians control them both. The two countries havedeveloped close economic, military, technological and strategic tieswhich include involvement in ChinaÕs ÔSilk RoadÕ transport andeconomic initiative to connect China with Europe. Israel was the Þrstcountry in the Middle East to recognise the establishment of MaoÕstyranny in 1950 months aer it was established.
Project Wuhan Ð the ÔCovidÕ Psyop 
I emphasise again that the Cult plays the long game and what ishappening to the world today is the result of centuries of calculatedmanipulation following a script to take control step-by-step of everyaspect of human society. I will discuss later the common forcebehind all this that has spanned those centuries and thousands ofyears if the truth be told. Instigating the Mao revolution in China in1949 with a 2020 ÔpandemicÕ in mind is not only how they work Ð the71 years between them is really quite short by the CultÕs standards ofmanipulation preparation. The reason for the CultÕs Chineserevolution was to create a Þercely-controlled environment withinwhich an extreme structure for human control could be incubated toeventually be unleashed across the world. We have seen this happensince the ÔpandemicÕ emerged from China with the Chinese control-structure founded on AI technology and tyrannical enforcementsweep across the West. Until the moment when the Cult went forbroke in the West and put its fascism on public display Westerngovernments had to pay some lip-service to freedom and democracyto not alert too many people to the tyranny-in-the-making. Freedomswere more subtly eroded and power centralised with covertgovernment structures put in place waiting for the arrival of 2020when that smokescreen of ÔfreedomÕ could be dispensed with. TheWest was not able to move towards tyranny before 2020 anythinglike as fast as China which was created as a tyranny and had nolimits on how fast it could construct the CultÕs blueprint for globalcontrol. When the time came to impose that structure on the world itwas the same Cult-owned Chinese communist/fascist governmentthat provided the excuse Ð the ÔCovid pandemicÕ. It was absolutelycrucial to the Cult plan for the Chinese response to the ÔpandemicÕ Ðdraconian lockdowns of the entire population Ð to become theblueprint that Western countries would follow to destroy thelivelihoods and freedom of their people. This is why the Cult-owned, Gates-owned, WHO Director-General Tedros said early on:
The Chinese government is to be congratulated for the extraordinary measures it has taken to contain the outbreak. China is actually setting a new standard for outbreak response and it is not an exaggeration. 
Forbes magazine said of China: ÔÉ those measures protected untoldmillions from geÔepidemic scenarioÕ document in 2010 said ÔpropheticallyÕ:
However, a few countries did fare better Ð China in particular. The Chinese governmentÕs quick imposition and enforcement of mandatory quarantine for all citizens, as well as its instant and near-hermetic sealing off of all borders, saved millions of lives, stopping the spread of the virus far earlier than in other countries and enabling a swifter post-pandemic recovery. 
Once again Ð spooky.
The Þrst o.cial story was the Ôbat theoryÕ or rather the batdiversion. The source of the Ôvirus outbreakÕ we were told was aÔÔwet marketÕ in Wuhan where bats and other animals are boughtand eaten in horriÞcally unhygienic conditions. Then another storyemerged through the alternative media that the ÔvirusÕ had beenreleased on purpose or by accident from a BSL-4 (biosafety level 4)laboratory in Wuhan not far from the wet market. The lab wasreported to create and work with lethal concoctions andbioweapons. Biosafety level 4 is the highest in the World HealthOrganization system of safety and containment. Renegade Minds areaware of what I call designer manipulation. The ideal for the Cult isfor people to buy its prime narrative which in the opening salvoes ofthe ÔpandemicÕ was the wet market story. It knows, however, thatthere is now a considerable worldwide alternative media ofresearchers sceptical of anything governments say and they are oengiven a version of events in a form they can perceive as crediblewhile misdirecting them from the real truth. In this case let themthink that the conspiracy involved is a Ôbioweapon virusÕ releasedfrom the Wuhan lab to keep them from the real conspiracy Ð there is no ÔvirusÕ. The WHOÕs current position on the source of the outbreakat the time of writing appears to be: ÔWe havenÕt got a clue, mate.ÕThis is a good position to maintain mystery and bewilderment. Theinner circle will know where the ÔvirusÕ came from Ð nowhere. Theboas to ensure the public believed there was a ÔvirusÕ andit didnÕt much maas natural or had beenreleased from a lab. The belief that there was a Ôdeadly virusÕ was allthat was needed to trigger global panic and fear. The population wasterriÞed into handing their power to authority and doing what theywere told. They had to or they were Ôall gonna dieÕ.
In March, 2020, information began to come my way from realdoctors and scientists and my own additional research which hadmy intuition screaming: ÔYes, thatÕs it! There is no virus.Õ TheÔbioweaponÕ was not the ÔvirusÕ; it was the ÔvaccineÕ already beingtalked about that would be the bioweapon. My conclusion wasfurther enhanced by happenings in Wuhan. The ÔvirusÕ was said tobe sweeping the city and news footage circulated of peoplecollapsing in the street (which theyÕve never done in the West withthe same ÔvirusÕ). The Chinese government was building ÔnewhospitalsÕ in a maas thevirulent nature of the ÔvirusÕ. Yet in what seemed like no time theÔnew hospitalsÕ closed Ð even if they even opened Ð and Chinadeclared itself Ôvirus-freeÕ. It was back to business as usual. This wasmore propaganda to promote the Chinese draconian lockdowns inthe West as the way to Ôbeat the virusÕ. Trouble was that wesubsequently had lockdown aer lockdown, but never business asusual. As the people of the West and most of the rest of the worldwere caught in an ever-worsening spiral of lockdown, socialdistancing, masks, isolated old people, families forced apart, andlivelihood destruction, it was party-time in Wuhan. Picturesemerged of thousands of people enjoying pool parties and concerts.It made no sense until you realised there never was a ÔvirusÕ and thewhole thing was a Cult set-up to transform human society out of oneits major global strongholds Ð China.
How is it possible to deceive virtually the entire world populationinto believing there is a deadly virus when there is not even a ÔvirusÕlet alone a deadly one? ItÕs nothing like as di.cult as you wouldthink and thatÕs clearly true because it happened.
Postscript: See end of book Postscript for more on the ÔWuhan labvirus releaseÕ story which the authorities and media were pushingheavily in the summer of 2021 to divert athe ÔCovid virusÕ is pure invention.
CHAPTER FIVE 
There is no ÔvirusÕ 
You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time 
Abraham Lincoln 
The greatest form of mind control is repetition. The more yourepeat the same mantra of alleged ÔfactsÕ the more will acceptthem to be true. It becomes an Ôeveryone knows that, mateÕ. If youcan also censor any other version or alternative to your allegedÔfactsÕ you are pre
By the start of 2020 the Cult owned the global mainstream mediaalmost in its entirety to spew out its ÔCovidÕ propaganda and ignoreor discredit any other information and view. Cult-owned socialmedia platforms in Cult-owned Silicon Valley were poised andready to unleash a campaign of ferocious censorship to obliterate allbut the o.cial narrative. To complete the circle many demands forcensorship by Silicon Valley were led by the mainstream media asÔjournalistsÕ became full-out enforcers for the Cult both aspropagandists and censors. Part of this has been the inßux of youngpeople straight out of university who have become ÔjournalistsÕ insigniÞcant positions. They have no experience and a headful ofprogrammed perceptions from their years at school and university ata time when todayÕs young are the most perceptually-targetedgenerations in known human history given the insidious impact oftechnology. They enter the media perceptually prepared and readyto repeat the narratives of the system that programmed them torepeat its narratives. The BBC has a truly pathetic Ôspecialistdisinformation reporterÕ called Marianna Spring who Þts this billperfectly. She is clueless about the world, how it works and what isreally going on. Her role is to discredit anyone doing the job that aproper journalist would do and system-serving hacks like SpringwouldnÕt dare to do or even see the need to do. They are too busylicking the arse of authority which can never be wrong and, in thecase of the BBC propaganda programme, Panorama, contactingpayments systems such as PayPal to have a donations page takendown for a Þlm company making documentaries questioningvaccines. Even the BBC soap opera EastEnders included adisgracefully biased scene in which an inarticulate white workingclass woman was made to look foolish for questioning the ÔvaccineÕwhile a well-spoken black man and Asian woman promoted thegovernment narrative. It ticked every BBC box and the fact that theblack and minority community was resisting the ÔvaccineÕ hadnothing to do with the way the scene was wribecome a disgusting tyrannical propaganda and censorshipoperation that should be defunded and disbanded and a free mediatake its place with a brief to stop censorship instead of demanding it.A BBC ÔinterviewÕ with Gates goes something like: ÔMr Gates, sir, if Ican call you sir, would you like to tell our audience why you aresuch a great man, a wonderful humanitarian philanthropist, andwhy you should absolutely be allowed as a soware salesman todecide health policy for approaching eight billion people? Thankyou, sir, please sir.Õ Propaganda programming has been incessantand merciless and when all you hear is the same story from themedia, repeated by those around you who have only heard the samestory, is it any wonder that people on a grand scale believe absolutemendacious garbage to be true? You are about to see, too, why thislevel of information control is necessary when the o.cial ÔCovidÕnarrative is so nonsensical and unsupportable by the evidence.
Structure of Deceit 
The pyramid structure through which the ÔCovidÕ hoax has beenmanifested is very simple and has to be to work. As few people aspossible have to be involved with full knowledge of what they aredoing Ð and why Ð or the real story would get out. At the top of thepyramid are the inner core of the Cult which controls Bill Gates who,in turn, controls the World Health Organization through his pivotalfunding and his puppet Director-General mouthpiece, Tedros.Before he was appointed Tedros was chair of the Gates-foundedGlobal Fund to ÔÞght against AIDS, tuberculosis and malariaÕ, aboard member of the Gates-funded Ôvaccine allianceÕ GAVI, and onthe board of another Gates-funded organisation. Gates owns himand picked him for a speciÞc reason Ð Tedros is a crook and worse.ÔDrÕ Tedros (heÕs not a medical doctor, the Þrst WHO chief not to be)was a member of the tyrannical Marxist government of Ethiopia fordecades with all its human rights abuses. He has faced allegations ofcorruption and misappropriation of funds and was exposed threetimes for covering up cholera epidemics while EthiopiaÕs healthminister. Tedros appointed the mass-murdering genocidalZimbabwe dictator Robert Mugabe as a WHO goodwill ambassadorfor public health which, as with Tedros, is like appointing apsychopath to run a peace and love campaign. The move was soridiculous that he had to drop Mugabe in the face of widespreadcondemnation. American economist David Steinman, a Nobel peaceprize nominee, lodged a complaint with the International CriminalCourt in The Hague over alleged genocide by Tedros when he wasEthiopiaÕs foreign minister. Steinman says Tedros was a Ôcrucialdecision makerÕ who directed the actions of EthiopiaÕs security forcesfrom 2013 to 2015 and one of three o.cials in charge when thosesecurity services embarked on the ÔkillingÕ and ÔtorturingÕ ofEthiopians. You can see where Tedros is coming from and itÕssobering to think that he has been the vehicle for Gates and the Cultto direct the global response to ÔCovidÕ. Think about that. Apsychopathic Cult dictates to psychopath Gates who dictates topsychopath Tedros who dictates how countries of the world mustrespond to a ÔCovid virusÕ never scientiÞcally shown to exist. At thesame time psychopathic Cult-owned Silicon Valley informationgiants like Google, YouTube, Facebook and Twieryearly on that they would give the Cult/Gates/Tedros/WHO versionof the narrative free advertising and censor those who challengedtheir intelligence-insulting, mendacious story.
The next layer in the global ÔmedicalÕ structure below the Cult,Gates and Tedros are the chief medical o.cers and science ÔadvisersÕin each of the WHO member countries which means virtually all ofthem. Medical o.cers and arbiters of science (theyÕre not) then takethe WHO policy and recommended responses and impose them ontheir countryÕs population while the political ÔleadersÕ say they aredeciding policy (theyÕre clearly not) by Ôfollowing the scienceÕ on theadvice of the ÔexpertsÕ Ð the same medical o.cers and scienceÔadvisersÕ (dictators). In this way with the rarest of exceptions theentire world followed the same policy of lockdown, peopledistancing, masks and ÔvaccinesÕ dictated by the psychopathic Cult,psychopathic Gates and psychopathic Tedros who we are supposedto believe give a damn about the health of the world population theyare seeking to enslave. That, amazingly, is all there is to it in terms ofcrucial decision-making. Medical sta. in each country then followlike sheep the dictates of the shepherds at the top of the nationalmedical hierarchies Ð chief medical o.cers and science ÔadvisersÕwho themselves follow like sheep the shepherds of the World HealthOrganization and the Cult. Shepherds at the national level oenhave major funding and other connections to Gates and his Bill andMelinda Gates Foundation which carefully hands out money likeconfeedding to control the entire global medical systemfrom the WHO down.
Follow the money 
Christopher Whi, Chief Medical Adviser to the UK Government atthe centre of ÔvirusÕ policy, a senior adviser to the governmentÕsScientiÞc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE), and ExecutiveBoard member of the World Health Organization, was gied a grantof $40 million by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for malariaresearch in Africa. The BBC described the unelected Whio.cial who will probably have the greatest impact on our everydaylives of any individual policymaker in modern timesÕ and so itturned out. What Gates and Tedros have said Whihis equivalents around the world. Patrick Vallance, co-chair of SAGEand the governmentÕs Chief ScientiÞc Adviser, is a former executiveof Big Pharma giant GlaxoSmithKline with its fundamental Þnancialand business connections to Bill Gates. In September, 2020, it wasrevealed that Vallance owned a deferred bonus of shares inGlaxoSmithKline worth £600,000 while the company wasÔdevelopingÕ a ÔCovid vaccineÕ. Move along now Ð nothing to seehere Ð what could possibly be wrong with that? Imperial College inLondon, a major player in ÔCovidÕ policy in Britain and elsewherewith its ÔCovid-19Õ Response Team, is funded by Gates and has bigconnections to China while the now infamous Professor NeilFerguson, the useless Ôcomputer modellerÕ at Imperial College is alsofunded by Gates. Ferguson delivered the dramatically inaccurateexcuse for the Þrst lockdowns (much more in the next chapter). TheInstitute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) in the UnitedStates, another source of outrageously false ÔCovidÕ computermodels to justify lockdowns, is bankrolled by Gates who is avehement promotor of lockdowns. AmericaÕs version of WhiVallance, the again now infamous Anthony Fauci, has connections toÔCovid vaccineÕ maker Moderna as does Bill Gates through fundingfrom the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Fauci is director of theNational Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), amajor recipient of Gates money, and they are very close. DeborahBirx who was appointed White House Coronavirus ResponseCoordinator in February, 2020, is yet another with ties to Gates.Everywhere you look at the di.erent elements around the worldbehind the coordination and decision making of the ÔCovidÕ hoaxthere is Bill Gates and his money. They include the World HealthOrganization; Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the UnitedStates; National Institutes of Health (NIH) of Anthony Fauci;Imperial College and Neil Ferguson; the London School of Hygienewhere Chris Whiorked; Regulatory agencies like the UKMedicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)which gave emergency approval for ÔCovid vaccinesÕ; WellcomeTrust; GAVI, the Vaccine Alliance; the Coalition for EpidemicPreparedness Innovations (CEPI); Johns Hopkins University whichhas compiled the false ÔCovidÕ Þgures; and the World EconomicForum. A NationalÞle.com article said:
Gates has a lot of pull in the medical world, he has a multi-million dollar relationship with Dr. Fauci, and Fauci originally took the Gates line supporting vaccines and casting doubt on [the drug hydroxychloroquine]. Coronavirus response team member Dr. Deborah Birx, appointed by former president Obama to serve as United States Global AIDS Coordinator, also sits on the board of a group that has received billions from GatesÕ foundation, and Birx reportedly used a disputed Bill Gates-funded model for the White HouseÕs Coronavirus effort. Gates is a big proponent for a population lockdown scenario for the Coronavirus outbreak. 
Another funder of Moderna is the Defense Advanced ResearchProjects Agency (DARPA), the technology-development arm of thePentagon and one of the most sinister organisations on earth.DARPA had a major role with the CIA covert technology-fundingoperation In-Q-Tel in the development of Google and social mediawhich is now at the centre of global censorship. Fauci and Gates areextremely close and openly admit to talking regularly about ÔCovidÕpolicy, but then why wouldnÕt Gates have a seat at every nationalÔCovidÕ table aer his Foundation commiÔÞght against Covid-19Õ. When passed through our OrwellianTranslation Unit this means that he has bought and paid for the Cult-driven ÔCovidÕ response worldwide. Research the major ÔCovidÕresponse personnel in your own country and you will Þnd the sameGates funding and other connections again and again. Medical andscience chiefs following World Health Organization ÔpolicyÕ sit atopa medical hierarchy in their country of administrators, doctors andnursing sta.. These ÔsubordinatesÕ are told they must work andbehave in accordance with the policy delivered from the ÔtopÕ of thenational ÔhealthÕ pyramid which is largely the policy delivered bythe WHO which is the policy delivered by Gates and the Cult. Thewhole ÔCovidÕ narrative has been imposed on medical sta. by aclimate of fear although great numbers donÕt even need that tocomply. They do so through breathtaking levels of ignorance andinclude doctors who go through life simply repeating what BigPharma and their hierarchical masters tell them to say and believe.No wonder Big Pharma ÔmedicineÕ is one of the biggest killers onPlanet Earth.
The same top-down system of intimidation operates with regardto the Cult Big Pharma cartel which also dictates policy throughnational and global medical systems in this way. The Cult and BigPharma agendas are the same because the former controls and ownsthe la. ÔHealthÕ administrators, doctors, and nursing sta. are toldto support and parrot the dictated policy or they will faceconsequences which can include being Þred. How sad itÕs been to seemedical sta. meekly repeating and imposing Cult policy withoutquestion and most of those who can see through the deceit are onlywilling to speak anonymously o. the record. They know what willhappen if their identity is known. This has le the courageous few toexpose the lies about the ÔvirusÕ, face masks, overwhelmed hospitalsthat arenÕt, and the dangers of the ÔvaccineÕ that isnÕt a vaccine. Whenthese medical professionals and scientists, some renowned in theirÞeld, have taken to the Internet to expose the truth their articles,comments and videos have been deleted by Cult-owned Facebook,TwiouTube. What a real head-shaker to see YouTubevideos with leading world scientists and highly qualiÞed medicalspecialists with an added link underneath to the notorious Cultpropaganda website Wikipedia to Þnd the ÔfactsÕ about the samesubject.
HIV Ð the ÔCovidÕ trial-run 
IÕll give you an example of the consequences for health and truththat come from censorship and unquestioning belief in o.cialnarratives. The story was told by PCR inventor Kary Mullis in hisbook Dancing Naked in the Mind Field. He said that in 1984 heaccepted as just another scientiÞc fact that Luc Montagnier ofFranceÕs Pasteur Institute and Robert Gallo of AmericaÕs NationalInstitutes of Health had independently discovered that a ÔretrovirusÕdubbed HIV (human immunodeÞciency virus) caused AIDS. Theywere, aer all, Mullis writes, specialists in retroviruses. This is howthe medical and science pyramids work. Something is announced orassumed and then becomes an everybody-knows-that purely throughrepetition of the assumption as if it is fact. Complete crap becomesaccepted truth with no supporting evidence and only repetition ofthe crap. This is how a ÔvirusÕ that doesnÕt exist became the ÔvirusÕthat changed the world. The HIV-AIDS fairy story became a multi-billion pound industry and the media poured out propagandaterrifying the world about the deadly HIV ÔvirusÕ that caused thelethal AIDS. By then Mullis was working at a lab in Santa Monica,California, to detect retroviruses with his PCR test in blooddonations received by the Red Cross. In doing so he asked avirologist where he could Þnd a reference for HIV being the cause ofAIDS. ÔYou donÕt need a reference,Õ the virologist said É ÔEverybody knows it.Õ Mullis said he wanted to quote a reference in the report hewas doing and he said he felt a lisource of such an important discovery when everyone else seemedto. The virologist suggested he cite a report by the Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (CDC) on morbidity and mortality.Mullis read the report, but it only said that an organism had beenidentiÞed and did not say how. The report did not identify theoriginal scientiÞc work. Physicians, however, assumed (key recurringtheme) that if the CDC was convinced that HIV caused AIDS thenproof must exist. Mullis continues:
I did computer searches. Neither Montagnier, Gallo, nor anyone else had published papers describing experiments which led to the conclusion that HIV probably caused AIDS. I read the papers in Science for which they had become well known as AIDS doctors, but all they had said there was that they had found evidence of a past infection by something which was probably HIV in some AIDS patients. 
They found antibodies. Antibodies to viruses had always been considered evidence of past disease, not present disease. Antibodies signaled that the virus had been defeated. The patient had saved himself. There was no indication in these papers that this virus caused a disease. They didnÕt show that everybody with the antibodies had the disease. In fact they found some healthy people with antibodies. 
Mullis asked why their work had been published if Montagnierand Gallo hadnÕt really found this evidence, and why had they beenÞghting so hard to get credit for the discovery? He says he washesitant to write ÔHIV is the probable cause of AIDSÕ until he foundpublished evidence to support that. ÔTens of thousands of scientistsand researchers were spending billions of dollars a year doingresearch based on this idea,Õ Mullis writes. ÔThe reason had to bethere somewhere; otherwise these people would not have allowedtheir research to seestigation.Õ Hesaid he lectured about PCR at numerous meetings where peoplewere always talking about HIV and he asked them how they knewthat HIV was the cause of AIDS:
Everyone said something. Everyone had the answer at home, in the office, in some drawer. They all knew, and they would send me the papers as soon as they got back. But I never got any papers. Nobody ever sent me the news about how AIDS was caused by HIV. 
Eventually Mullis was able to ask Montagnier himself about thereference proof when he lectured in San Diego at the grand openingof the University of California AIDS Research Center. Mullis saysthis was the last time he would ask his question without showinganger. Montagnier said he should reference the CDC report. ÔI readitÕ, Mullis said, and it didnÕt answer the question. ÔIf MontagnierdidnÕt know the answer who the hell did?Õ Then one night Mulliswas driving when an interview came on National Public Radio withPeter Duesberg, a prominent virologist at Berkeley and a CaliforniaScientist of the Year. Mullis says he Þnally understood why he couldnot Þnd references that connected HIV to AIDS Ð there werenÕt any! No one had ever proved that HIV causes AIDS even though it hadspawned a multi-billion pound global industry and the media wasrepeating this as fact every day in their articles and broadcaststerrifying the shit out of people about AIDS and giving theimpression that a positive test for HIV (see ÔCovidÕ) was a deathsentence. Duesberg was a threat to the AIDS gravy train and theagenda that underpinned it. He was therefore abused and castigatedaer he told the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesthere was no good evidence implicating the new ÔvirusÕ. Editorsrejected his manuscripts and his research funds were deleted. Mullispoints out that the CDC has deÞned AIDS as one of more than 30diseases if accompanied by a positive result on a test that detectsantibodies to HIV; but those same diseases are not deÞned as AIDScases when antibodies are not detected:
If an HIV-positive woman develops uterine cancer, for example, she is considered to have AIDS. If she is not HIV positive, she simply has uterine cancer. An HIV-positive man with tuberculosis has AIDS; if he tests negative he simply has tuberculosis. If he lives in Kenya or Colombia, where the test for HIV antibodies is too expensive, he is simply presumed to have the antibodies and therefore AIDS, and therefore he can be treated in the World Health OrganizationÕs clinic. ItÕs the only medical help available in some places. And itÕs free, because the countries that support WHO are worried about AIDS. 
Mullis accuses the CDC of continually adding new diseases (see evermore ÔCovid symptomsÕ) to the grand AIDS deÞnition and ofvirtually doctoring the books to make it appear as if the diseasecontinued to spread. He cites how in 1993 the CDC enormouslybroadened its AIDS deÞnition and county health authorities weredelighted because they received $2,500 per year from the Federalgovernment for every reported AIDS case. Ladies and gentlemen, Ihave just described, via Kary Mullis, the ÔCovid pandemicÕ of 2020and beyond. Every element is the same and itÕs been pulled o. in thesame way by the same networks.
The ÔCovid virusÕ exists? Okay Ð prove it. Er É still waiting 
What Kary Mullis described with regard to ÔHIVÕ has been repeatedwith ÔCovidÕ. A claim is made that a new, or ÔnovelÕ, infection hasbeen found and the entire medical system of the world repeats thatas fact exactly as they did with HIV and AIDS. No one in themainstream asks rather relevant questions such as ÔHow do youknow?Õ and ÔWhere is your proof?Õ The SARS-Cov-2 ÔvirusÕ and theÔCovid-19 diseaseÕ became an overnight Ôeverybody-knows-thatÕ.The origin could be debated and mulled over, but what you couldnot suggest was that ÔSARS-Cov-2Õ didnÕt exist. That would beridiculous. ÔEverybody knowsÕ the ÔvirusÕ exists. Well, I didnÕt forone along with American proper doctors like Andrew Kaufman andTom Cowan and long-time American proper journalist JonRappaport. We dared to pursue the obvious and simple question:ÔWhereÕs the evidence?Õ The overwhelming majority in medicine,journalism and the general public did not think to ask that. Aer all,everyone knew there was a new ÔvirusÕ. Everyone was saying so and Iheard it on the BBC. Some would eventually argue that the ÔdeadlyvirusÕ was nothing like as deadly as claimed, but few would ventureinto the realms of its very existence. Had they done so they wouldhave found that the evidence for that claim had gone AWOL as withHIV causes AIDS. In fact, not even that. For something to go AWOLit has to exist in the Þrst place and scientiÞc proof for a ÔSARS-Cov-2Õcan be Þled under nothing, nowhere and zilch.
Dr Andrew Kaufman is a board-certiÞed forensic psychiatrist inNew York State, a Doctor of Medicine and former AssistantProfessor and Medical Director of Psychiatry at SUNY UpstateMedical University, and Medical Instructor of Hematology andOncology at the Medical School of South Carolina. He also studiedbiology at the Massachuseechnology (MIT) andtrained in Psychiatry at Duke University. Kaufman is retired fromallopathic medicine, but remains a consultant and educator onnatural healing, I saw a video of his very early on in the ÔCovidÕ hoaxin which he questioned claims about the ÔvirusÕ in the absence of anysupporting evidence and with plenty pointing the other way. I dideverything I could to circulate his work which I felt was asking thepivotal questions that needed an answer. I can recommend anexcellent pull-together interview he did with the website The LastVagabond entitled Dr Andrew Kaufman: Virus Isolation, Terrain Theory and Covid-19 and his website is andrewkaufmanmd.com. Kaufman isnot only a forensic psychiatrist; he is forensic in all that he does. Healways reads original scientiÞc papers, experiments and studiesinstead of second-third-fourth-hand reports about the ÔvirusÕ in themedia which are repeating the repeated repetition of the narrative.When he did so with the original Chinese ÔvirusÕ papers Kaufmanrealised that there was no evidence of a ÔSARS-Cov-2Õ. They hadnever Ð from the start Ð shown it to exist and every repeat of thisclaim worldwide was based on the accepted existence of proof thatwas nowhere to be found Ð see Kary Mullis and HIV. Here we goagain.
LetÕs postulate 
Kaufman discovered that the Chinese authorities immediatelyconcluded that the cause of an illness that broke out among about200 initial patients in Wuhan was a Ônew virusÕ when there were nogrounds to make that conclusion. The alleged ÔvirusÕ was notisolated from other genetic material in their samples and then shownthrough a system known as KochÕs postulates to be the causativeagent of the illness. The world was told that the SARS-Cov-2 ÔvirusÕcaused a disease they called ÔCovid-19Õ which had Ôßu-likeÕsymptoms and could lead to respiratory problems and pneumonia.If it wasnÕt so tragic it would almost be funny. ÔFlu-likeÕ symptomsÕ? Pneumonia? Respiratory disease? What in CHINA and particularly inWuhan, one of the most polluted cities in the world with a resultingepidemic of respiratory disease?? Three hundred thousand peopleget pneumonia in China every year and there are nearly a billioncases worldwide of Ôßu-like symptomsÕ. These have a whole range ofcauses Ð including pollution in Wuhan Ð but no other possibility wascredibly considered in late 2019 when the world was told there was anew and deadly ÔvirusÕ. The global prevalence of pneumonia andÔßu-like systemsÕ gave the Cult networks unlimited potential to re-diagnose these other causes as the mythical ÔCovid-19Õ and that iswhat they did from the very start. Kaufman revealed how Chinesemedical and science authorities (all subordinates to the Cult-ownedcommunist government) took genetic material from the lungs ofonly a few of the Þrst patients. The material contained their owncells, bacteria, fungi and other microorganisms living in their bodies.The only way you could prove the existence of the ÔvirusÕ and itsresponsibility for the alleged ÔCovid-19Õ was to isolate the virus fromall the other material Ð a process also known as ÔpuriÞcationÕ Ð andthen follow the postulates sequence developed in the late 19thcentury by German physician and bacteriologist Robert Koch whichbecame the Ôgold standardÕ for connecting an alleged causationagent to a disease:
1.
 The microorganism (bacteria, fungus, virus, etc.) must be present in every case of thedisease and all patients must have the same symptoms. It must also not be present in healthy individuals.

2.
 The microorganism must be isolated from the host with the disease. If the microorganismis a bacteria or fungus it must be grown in a pure culture. If it is a virus, it must be puriÞed


(i.e. containing no other material except the virus particles) from a clinical sample.
3.
 The speciÞc disease, with all of its characteristics, must be reproduced when theinfectious agent (the puriÞed virus or a pure culture of bacteria or fungi) is inoculated into ahealthy, susceptible host.

4.
 The microorganism must be recoverable from the experimentally infected host as in step2.


Not one of these criteria has been met in the case of ÔSARS-Cov-2Õ andÔCovid-19Õ. Not ONE. EVER. Robert Koch refers to bacteria and notviruses. What are called Ôviral particlesÕ are so minute (hence masksare useless by any deÞnition) that they could only be seen aer theinvention of the electron microscope in the 1930s and can still onlybe observed through that means. American bacteriologist andvirologist Thomas Milton Rivers, the so-called ÔFather of ModernVirologyÕ who was very signiÞcantly director of the RockefellerInstitute for Medical Research in the 1930s, developed a lessstringent version of KochÕs postulates to identify ÔvirusÕ causationknown as ÔRivers criteriaÕ. ÔCovidÕ did not pass that process either.Some even doubt whether any ÔvirusÕ can be isolated from otherparticles containing genetic material in the Koch method. Freedomof Information requests in many countries asking for scientiÞc proofthat the ÔCovid virusÕ has been puriÞed and isolated and shown toexist have all come back with a Ôwe donÕt have thatÕ and when thishappened with a request to the UK Department of Health theyadded this comment:
However, outside of the scope of the [Freedom of Information Act] and on a discretionary basis, the following information has been advised to us, which may be of interest. Most infectious diseases are caused by viruses, bacteria or fungi. Some bacteria or fungi have the capacity to grow on their own in isolation, for example in colonies on a petri dish. Viruses are different in that they are what we call Ôobligate pathogensÕ Ð that is, they cannot survive or reproduce without infecting a host ... 
É For some diseases, it is possible to establish causation between a microorganism and a disease by isolating the pathogen from a patient, growing it in pure culture and reintroducing it to a healthy organism. These are known as ÔKochÕs postulatesÕ and were developed in 1882. However, as our understanding of disease and different disease-causing agents has advanced, these are no longer the method for determining causation [Andrew Kaufman asks why in that case are there two published articles falsely claiming to satisfy KochÕs postulates]. 
It has long been known that viral diseases cannot be identified in this way as viruses cannot be grown in Ôpure cultureÕ. When a patient is tested for a viral illness, this is normally done by looking for the presence of antigens, or viral genetic code in a host with molecular biology techniques [Kaufman asks how you could know the origin of these chemicals without having a pure culture for comparison]. 
For the record ÔantigensÕ are deÞned so:
Invading microorganisms have antigens on their surface that the human body can recognise as being foreign Ð meaning not belonging to it. When the body recognises a foreign antigen, lymphocytes (white blood cells) produce antibodies, which are complementary in shape to the antigen. 
Notwithstanding that this is open to question in relation to ÔSARS.Cov-2Õ the presence of ÔantibodiesÕ can have many causes and theyare found in people that are perfectly well. Kary Mullis said:ÔAntibodies É had always been considered evidence of past disease,not present disease.Õ
ÔCovidÕ really is a computer ÔvirusÕ 
Where the UK Department of Health statement says ÔvirusesÕ arenow ÔdiagnosedÕ through a Ôviral genetic code in a host withmolecular biology techniquesÕ, they mean É the PCR test which itsinventor said cannot test for infectious disease. They have nocredible method of connecting a ÔvirusÕ to a disease and we will seethat there is no scientiÞc proof that any ÔvirusÕ causes any disease orthere is any such thing as a ÔvirusÕ in the way that it is described.Tenacious Canadian researcher Christine Massey and her team madesome 40 Freedom of Information requests to national public healthagencies in di.erent countries asking for proof that SARS-CoV-2 hasbeen isolated and not one of them could supply that information.Massey said of her request in Canada: ÔFreedom of Informationreveals Public Health Agency of Canada has no record of ÔSARS.COV-2Õ isolation performed by anyone, anywhere, ever.Õ If youaccept the comment from the UK Department of Health itÕs becausethey canÕt isolate a ÔvirusÕ. Even so many ÔscienceÕ papers claimed tohave isolated the ÔCovid virusÕ until they were questioned and hadto admit they hadnÕt. A reply from the Robert Koch Institute inGermany was typical: ÔI am not aware of a paper which puriÞedisolated SARS-CoV-2.Õ So what the hell was Christian Drosten andhis gang using to design the ÔCovidÕ testing protocol that hasproduced all the illusory CovidÕ cases and ÔCovidÕ deaths when thehead of the Chinese version of the CDC admias aproblem right from the start in that the ÔvirusÕ had never beenisolated/puriÞed? Breathe deeply: What they are calling ÔCovidÕ isactually created by a computer program i.e. they made it up Ð er, thatÕsit. They took lung ßuid, with many sources of genetic material, fromone single person alleged to be infected with Covid-19 by a PCR testwhich they claimed, without clear evidence, contained a ÔvirusÕ. Theyused several computer programs to create a model of a theoreticalvirus genome sequence from more than Þy-six million smallsequences of RNA, each of an unknown source, assembling themlike a puzzle with no known solution. The computer Þlled in thegaps with sequences from bits in the gene bank to make it look like abat SARS-like coronavirus! A wave of the magic wand and poof, anin silico (computer-generated) genome, a scientiÞc fantasy, wascreated. UK health researcher Dr Kevin Corbewith this analogy:
É ItÕs like giving you a few bones and saying thatÕs your fish. It could be any fish. Not even a skeleton. HereÕs a few fragments of bones. ThatÕs your fish É ItÕs all from gene bank and the bits of the virus sequence that werenÕt there they made up. 
They synthetically created them to fill in the blanks. ThatÕs what genetics is; itÕs a code. So itÕs ABBBCCDDD and youÕre missing some what you think is EEE so you put it in. ItÕs all 
synthetic. You just manufacture the bits that are missing. This is the end result of the geneticization of virology. This is basically a computer virus. 
Further conÞrmation came in an email exchange between Britishcitizen journalist Frances Leader and the governmentÕs Medicines &Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (the Gates-funded MHRA)which gave emergency permission for untested ÔCovid vaccinesÕ tobe used. The agency admiaccineÕ is not based on anisolated ÔvirusÕ, but comes from a computer-generated model. FrancesLeader was naturally banned from Cult-owned fascist Twimaking this exchange public. The process of creating computer-generated alleged ÔvirusesÕ is called Ôin silicoÕ or Ôin siliconÕ Ðcomputer chips Ð and the term Ôin silicoÕ is believed to originate withbiological experiments using only a computer in 1989. ÔVaccinesÕinvolved with ÔCovidÕ are also produced Ôin silicoÕ or by computernot a natural process. If the original ÔvirusÕ is nothing more than amade-up computer model how can there be Ônew variantsÕ ofsomething that never existed in the Þrst place? They are not newÔvariantsÕ; they are new computer models only minutely di.erent tothe original program and designed to further terrify the populationinto having the ÔvaccineÕ and submiou want a ÔnewvariantÕ? Click, click, enter Ð there you go. Tell the medicalprofession that you have discovered a ÔSouth African variantÕ, ÔUKvariantsÕ or a ÔBrazilian variantÕ and in the usual HIV-causes-AIDSmanner they will unquestioningly repeat it with no evidencewhatsoever to support these claims. They will go on television andwarn about the dangers of Ônew variantsÕ while doing nothing morethan repeating what they have been told to be true and knowing thatany deviation from that would be career suicide. Big-time insiderswill know itÕs a hoax, but much of the medical community is cluelessabout the way they are being played and themselves play the publicwithout even being aware they are doing so. What an interestingÔcoincidenceÕ that AstraZeneca and Oxford University wereconducting ÔCovid vaccine trialsÕ in the three countries Ð the UK,South Africa and Brazil Ð where the Þrst three ÔvariantsÕ wereclaimed to have Ôbroken outÕ.
HereÕs your ÔvirusÕ Ð itÕs a unicorn 
Dr Andrew Kaufman presented a brilliant analysis describing howthe ÔvirusÕ was imagined into fake existence when he dissected anarticle published by Nature and wrialleged Ôsequencing of a complete viral genomeÕ of the Ônew SARS.CoV-2 virusÕ. This computer-modelled in silico genome was used as atemplate for all subsequent genome sequencing experiments thatresulted in the so-called variants which he said now number morethan 6,000. The fake genome was constructed from more than 56million individual short strands of RNA. Those liereassembled into longer pieces by Þnding areas of overlappingsequences. The computer programs created over two millionpossible combinations from which the authors simply chose thelongest one. They then compared this to a Ôbat virusÕ and thecomputer ÔalignmentÕ rearranged the sequence and Þlled in the gaps!They called this computer-generated abomination the ÔcompletegenomeÕ. Dr Tom Cowan, a fellow medical author and collaboratorwith Kaufman, said such computer-generation constitutes scientiÞcfraud and he makes this superb analogy:
Here is an equivalency: A group of researchers claim to have found a unicorn because they found a piece of a hoof, a hair from a tail, and a snippet of a horn. They then add that information into a computer and program it to re-create the unicorn, and they then claim this computer re-creation is the real unicorn. Of course, they had never actually seen a unicorn so could not possibly have examined its genetic makeup to compare their samples with the actual unicornÕs hair, hooves and horn. 
The researchers claim they decided which is the real genome of SARS-CoV-2 by ÔconsensusÕ, sort of like a vote. Again, different computer programs will come up with different versions of the imaginary ÔunicornÕ, so they come together as a group and decide which is the real imaginary unicorn. 
This is how the ÔvirusÕ that has transformed the world was broughtinto fraudulent ÔexistenceÕ. Extraordinary, yes, but as the Nazis saidthe bigger the lie the more will believe it. Cowan, however, wasnÕtÞnished and he went on to identify what he called the realblockbuster in the paper. He quotes this section from a paper wriby virologists and published by the CDC and then explains what itmeans:
Therefore, we examined the capacity of SARS-CoV-2 to infect and replicate in several common primate and human cell lines, including human adenocarcinoma cells (A549), human liver cells (HUH 7.0), and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293T). In addition to Vero E6 and Vero CCL81 cells. ... Each cell line was inoculated at high multiplicity of infection and examined 24h post-infection. 
No CPE was observed in any of the cell lines except in Vero cells, which grew to greater than 10 to the 7th power at 24 h post-infection. In contrast, HUH 7.0 and 293T showed only modest viral replication, and A549 cells were incompatible with SARS CoV-2 infection. 
Cowan explains that when virologists ae infectionthey have three possible ÔhostsÕ or models on which they can test.The Þrst was humans. Exposure to humans was generally not donefor ethical reasons and has never been done with SARS-CoV-2 or anycoronavirus. The second possible host was animals. Cowan said thatforgeer actually use puriÞed viruswhen exposing animals they do use solutions that they claim containthe virus. Exposure to animals has been done with SARS-CoV-2 inan experiment involving mice and this is what they found: None of the wild (normal) mice got sick. In a group of genetically-modiÞedmice, a statistically insigniÞcant number lost weight and had slightlybristled fur, but they experienced nothing like the illness calledÔCovid-19Õ. Cowan said the third method Ð the one they mostly relyon Ð is to inoculate solutions they say contain the virus onto a varietyof tissue cultures. This process had never been shown to kill tissueunless the sample material was starved of nutrients and poisoned aspart of the process. Yes, incredibly, in tissue experiments designed toshow the ÔvirusÕ is responsible for killing the tissue they starve thetissue of nutrients and add toxic drugs including antibiotics and theydo not have control studies to see if itÕs the starvation and poisoningthat is degrading the tissue rather than the ÔvirusÕ they allege to be inthere somewhere. You want me to pinch you? Yep, I understand.Tom Cowan said this about the whole nonsensical farce as heexplains what that quote from the CDC paper really means:
The shocking thing about the above quote is that using their own methods, the virologists found that solutions containing SARS-CoV-2 Ð even in high amounts Ð were NOT, I repeat NOT, infective to any of the three human tissue cultures they tested. In plain English, this means they proved, on their terms, that this Ônew coronavirusÕ is not infectious to human beings. It is ONLY infective to monkey kidney cells, and only then when you add two potent drugs (gentamicin and amphotericin), known to be toxic to kidneys, to the mix. 
My friends, read this again and again. These virologists, published by the CDC, performed a clear proof, on their terms, showing that the SARS-CoV-2 virus is harmless to human beings. That is the only possible conclusion, but, unfortunately, this result is not even mentioned in their conclusion. They simply say they can provide virus stocks cultured only on monkey Vero cells, thanks for coming. 
Cowan concluded: ÔIf people really understood how this ÒscienceÓwas done, I would hope they would storm the gates and demandhonesty, transparency and truth.Õ Dr Michael Yeadon, former VicePresident and Chief ScientiÞc Adviser at drug giant PÞzer has been avocal critic of the ÔCovid vaccineÕ and its potential for multiple harm.He said in an interview in April, 2021, that Ônot one [vaccine] has thevirus. He was asked why vaccines normally using a ÔdeadÕ version ofa disease to activate the immune system were not used for ÔCovidÕand instead we had the synthetic methods of the ÔmRNA CovidvaccineÕ. Yeadon said that to do the former ÔyouÕd have to have someof [the virus] wouldnÕt you?Õ He added: ÔNo-oneÕs got any Ðseriously.Õ Yeadon said that surely they couldnÕt have fooled thewhole world for a year without having a virus, Ôbut oddly enoughask around Ð no oneÕs got itÕ. He didnÕt know why with all the ÔgreatlabsÕ around the world that the virus had not been isolated Ð ÔMaybetheyÕve been too busy running bad PCR tests and vaccines thatpeople donÕt need.Õ What is today called ÔscienceÕ is not ÔscienceÕ atall. Science is no longer what is, but whatever people can bemanipulated to believe that it is. Real science has been h.acked by theCult to dispense and produce the Ôexpert scientistsÕ and contentionsthat suit the agenda of the Cult. How big-time this has happenedwith the ÔCovidÕ hoax which is entirely based on fake sciencedelivered by fake ÔscientistsÕ and fake ÔdoctorsÕ. The human-causedclimate change hoax is also entirely based on fake science deliveredby fake ÔscientistsÕ and fake Ôclimate expertsÕ. In both cases realscientists, climate experts and doctors have their views suppressedand deleted by the Cult-owned science establishment, media andSilicon Valley. This is the ÔscienceÕ that politicians claim to beÔfollowingÕ and a common denominator of ÔCovidÕ and climate areCult psychopaths Bill Gates and his mate Klaus Schwab at the Gates-funded World Economic Forum. But, donÕt worry, itÕs all just acoincidence and absolutely nothing to worry about. Zzzzzzzz.
What is a ÔvirusÕ REALLY? 
Dr Tom Cowan is one of many contesting the very existence ofviruses let alone that they cause disease. This is understandablewhen there is no scientiÞc evidence for a disease-causing ÔvirusÕ.German virologist Dr Stefan Lanka won a landmark case in 2017 inthe German Supreme Court over his contention that there is no suchthing as a measles virus. He had o.ered a big prize for anyone whocould prove there is and Lanka won his case when someone soughtto claim the money. There is currently a prize of more than 225,000euros on o.er from an Isolate Truth Fund for anyone who can provethe isolation of SARS-CoV-2 and its genetic substance. Lanka wrotein an article headed ÔThe Misconception Called VirusÕ that scientiststhink a ÔvirusÕ is causing tissue to become diseased and degradedwhen in fact it is the processes they are using which do that Ð not aÔvirusÕ. Lanka has done an important job in making this point clearas Cowan did in his analysis of the CDC paper. Lanka says that allclaims about viruses as disease-causing pathogens are wrong andbased on Ôeasily recognisable, understandable and veriÞablemisinterpretations.Õ Scientists believed they were working withÔvirusesÕ in their laboratories when they were really working withÔtypical particles of speciÞc dying tissues or cells ÉÕ Lanka said thatthe tissue decaying process claimed to be caused by a ÔvirusÕ stillhappens when no alleged ÔvirusÕ is involved. ItÕs the process that doesthe damage and not a ÔvirusÕ. The genetic sample is deprived ofnutrients, removed from its energy supply through removal fromthe body and then doused in toxic antibiotics to remove any bacteria.He conÞrms again that establishment scientists do not (pinch me)conduct control experiments to see if this is the case and if they didthey would see the claims that ÔvirusesÕ are doing the damage isnonsense. He adds that during the measles ÔvirusÕ court case hecommissioned an independent laboratory to perform just such acontrol experiment and the result was that the tissues and cells diedin the exact same way as with alleged ÔinfectedÕ material. This issupported by a gathering number of scientists, doctors andresearchers who reject what is called Ôgerm theoryÕ or the belief inthe body being infected by contagious sources emipeople. Researchers Dawn Lester and David Parker take the samestance in their highly-detailed and sourced book What Really Makes You Ill Ð Why everything you thought you knew about disease is wrong
which was recommended to me by a number of medicalprofessionals genuinely seeking the truth. Lester and Parker saythere is no provable scientiÞc evidence to show that a ÔvirusÕ can betransmieen people or people and animals or animals andpeople:
The definition also claims that viruses are the cause of many diseases, as if this has been definitively proven. But this is not the case; there is no original scientific evidence that definitively demonstrates that any virus is the cause of any disease. The burden of proof for any theory lies with those who proposed it; but none of the existing documents provides ÔproofÕ that supports the claim that ÔvirusesÕ are pathogens. 
Dr Tom Cowan employs one of his clever analogies to describe theprocess by which a ÔvirusÕ is named as the culprit for a disease whenwhat is called a ÔvirusÕ is only material released by cells detoxingthemselves from inÞltration by chemical or radiation poisoning. Thetidal wave of technologically-generated radiation in the ÔsmartÕmodern world plus all the toxic food and drink are causing this tohappen more than ever. Deluded ÔscientistsÕ misread this as agathering impact of what they wrongly label ÔvirusesÕ.
Paper can infect houses 
Cowan said in an article for davidicke.com Ð with his tongue onlymildly in his cheek Ð that he believed he had made a tremendousdiscovery that may revolutionise science. He had discovered thatsmall bits of paper are alive, Ôwell alive-ishÕ, can ÔinfectÕ houses, andthen reproduce themselves inside the house. The result was that thisexplosion of growth in the paper inside the house causes the houseto explode, blowing it to smithereens. His evidence for this newtheory is that in the past months he had carefully examined many ofthe houses in his neighbourhood and found almost no scraps ofpaper on the lawns and surrounds of the house. There was anoccasional stray label, but nothing more. Then he would return tothese same houses a week or so later and with a few, not all of them,particularly the old and decrepit ones, he found to his shock andsurprise they were li. He knew thenthat the paper had infected these houses, made copies of itself, andblew up the house. A young boy on a bicycle at one of the sites toldhim he had seen a demolition crew using dynamite to explode thehouse the previous week, but Cowan dismissed this as the idlethoughts of silly boys because ÔI was on to something bigÕ. He wason to how ÔscientistsÕ mistake genetic material in the detoxifyingprocess for something they call a ÔvirusÕ. Cowan said of his houseand paper story:
If this sounds crazy to you, itÕs because it should. This scenario is obviously nuts. But consider this admittedly embellished, for effect, current viral theory that all scientists, medical doctors and virologists currently believe. 
He takes the example of the Ônovel SARS-Cov2Õ virus to prove thepoint. First they take someone with an undeÞned illness calledÔCovid-19Õ and donÕt even aNever mind the scientists still describe how this ÔvirusÕ, which theyhave not located a, injects its geneticmaterial, in ÔCovidÕsÕ case, RNA, into the cell. The RNA once insertedexploits the cell to reproduce itself and makes Ôthousands, naymillions, of copies of itself É Then it emerges victorious to claim itsnext victimÕ:
If you were to look in the scientific literature for proof, actual scientific proof, that uniform SARS-CoV2 viruses have been properly isolated from the sputum of a sick person, that actual spike proteins could be seen protruding from the virus (which has not been found), you would find that such evidence doesnÕt exist. 
If you go looking in the published scientific literature for actual pictures, proof, that these spike proteins or any viral proteins are ever attached to any receptor embedded in any cell membrane, you would also find that no such evidence exists. If you were to look for a video or documented evidence of the intact virus injecting its genetic material into the body of the cell, reproducing itself and then emerging victorious by budding off the cell membrane, you would find that no such evidence exists. 
The closest thing you would find is electron micrograph pictures of cellular particles, possibly attached to cell debris, both of which to be seen were stained by heavy metals, a process that completely distorts their architecture within the living organism. This is like finding bits of paper stuck to the blown-up bricks, thereby proving the paper emerged by taking pieces of the bricks on its way out. 
The Enders baloney 
Cowan describes the ÔCovidÕ story as being just as make-believe ashis paper story and he charts back this fantasy to a Nobel Prizewinner called John Enders (1897-1985), an American biomedicalscientist who has been dubbed ÔThe Father of Modern VaccinesÕ.Enders is claimed to have ÔdiscoveredÕ the process of the viralculture which ÔprovedÕ that a ÔvirusÕ caused measles. Cowanexplains how Enders did this Ôby using the EXACT same procedurethat has been followed by every virologist to Þnd and characterizeevery new virus since 1954Õ. Enders took throat swabs from childrenwith measles and immersed them in 2ml of milk. Penicillin (100u/ml)and the antibiotic streptomycin (50,g/ml) were added and the wholemix was centrifuged Ð rotated at high speed to separate large cellulardebris from small particles and molecules as with milk and cream,for example. Cowan says that if the aim is to Þnd ligenetic material (ÔvirusesÕ) in the snot from children with measles itwould seem that the last thing you would do is mix the snot withother material Ð milk Ðthat also has genetic material. ÔHow are youever going to know whether whatever you found came from the snotor the milk?Õ He points out that streptomycin is a ÔnephrotoxicÕ orpoisonous-to-the-kidney drug. You will see the relevance of thatshortly. Cowan says that it gets worse, much worse, when Endersdescribes the culture medium upon which the virus ÔgrowsÕ: ÔTheculture medium consisted of bovine amniotic ßuid (90%), beefembryo extract (5%), horse serum (5%), antibiotics and phenol red asan indicator of cell metabolism.Õ Cowan asks incredulously: ÔDid hejust say that the culture medium also contained ßuids and tissuesthat are themselves rich sources of genetic material?Õ The geneticcocktail, or ÔmediumÕ, is inoculated onto tissue and cells from rhesusmonkey kidney tissue. This is where the importance of streptomycincomes in and currently-used antimicrobials and other drugs that arepoisonous to kidneys and used in ALL modern viral cultures (e.g.gentamicin, streptomycin, and amphotericin). Cowan asks: ÔHow areyou ever going to know from this witchÕs brew where any geneticmaterial comes from as we now have Þve di.erent sources of richgenetic material in our mix?Õ Remember, he says, that all geneticmaterial, whether from monkey kidney tissues, bovine serum, milk,etc., is made from the exact same components. The same centralquestion returns: ÔHow are you possibly going to know that it wasthe virus that killed the kidney tissue and not the toxic antibiotic andstarvation rations on which you are growing the tissue?Õ John Endersanswered the question himself Ð you canÕt:
A second agent was obtained from an uninoculated culture of monkey kidney cells. The cytopathic changes [death of the cells] it induced in the unstained preparations could not be distinguished with confidence from the viruses isolated from measles. 
The death of the cells (Ôcytopathic changesÕ) happened in exactlythe same manner, whether they inoculated the kidney tissue with themeasles snot or not, Cowan says. ÔThis is evidence that thedestruction of the tissue, the very proof of viral causation of illness,was not caused by anything in the snot because they saw the samedestructive e.ect when the snot was not even used É the cytopathic,i.e., cell-killing, changes come from the process of the culture itself,not from any virus in any snot, period.Õ Enders quotes in his 1957paper a virologist called Ruckle as reporting similar Þndings Ôand inaddition has isolated an agent from monkey kidney tissue that is sofar indistinguishable from human measles virusÕ. In other words,Cowan says, these particles called Ômeasles virusesÕ are simply andclearly breakdown products of the starved and poisoned tissue. Formeasles ÔvirusÕ see all ÔvirusesÕ including the so-called ÔCovid virusÕ.Enders, the ÔFather of Modern VaccinesÕ, also said:
There is a potential risk in employing cultures of primate cells for the production of vaccines composed of attenuated virus, since the presence of other agents possibly latent in primate tissues cannot be definitely excluded by any known method. 
Cowan further quotes from a paper published in the journalViruses in May, 2020, while the ÔCovid pandemicÕ was wellunderway in the media if not in reality. ÔEVsÕ here refers to particlesof genetic debris from our own tissues, such as exosomes of whichmore in a moment: ÔThe remarkable resemblance between EVs andviruses has caused quite a few problems in the studies focused onthe analysis of EVs released during viral infections.Õ Later the paperadds that to date a reliable method that can actually guarantee acomplete separation (of EVs from viruses) DOES NOT EXIST. Thiswas published at a time when a fairy tale ÔvirusÕ was claimed in totalcertainty to be causing a fairy tale Ôviral diseaseÕ called ÔCovid-19Õ Ð afairy tale that was already well on the way to transforming humansociety in the image that the Cult has worked to achieve for so long.Cowan concludes his article:
To summarize, there is no scientific evidence that pathogenic viruses exist. What we think of as ÔvirusesÕ are simply the normal breakdown products of dead and dying tissues and cells. When we are well, we make fewer of these particles; when we are starved, poisoned, suffocated by wearing masks, or afraid, we make more. 
There is no engineered virus circulating and making people sick. People in laboratories all over the world are making genetically modified products to make people sick. These are called vaccines. There is no virome, no ÔecosystemÕ of viruses, viruses are not 8%, 50% or 100 % of our genetic material. These are all simply erroneous ideas based on the misconception called a virus. 
What is ÔCovidÕ? Load of bollocks 
The background described here by Cowan and Lanka wasemphasised in the Þrst video presentation that I saw by Dr AndrewKaufman when he asked whether the ÔCovid virusÕ was in truth anatural defence mechanism of the body called ÔexosomesÕ. These arereleased by cells when in states of toxicity Ð see the same themesreturning over and over. They are released ever more profusely aschemical and radiation toxicity increases and think of the potentiale.ect therefore of 5G alone as its destructive frequencies infest thehuman energetic information Þeld with a gathering pace (5G wentonline in Wuhan in 2019 as the ÔvirusÕ emerged). IÕll have more aboutthis later. Exosomes transmit a warning to the rest of the body thatÔHouston, we have a problemÕ. Kaufman presented images ofexosomes and compared them with ÔCovidÕ under an electronmicroscope and the similarity was remarkable. They both athe same cell receptors (claimed in the case of ÔCovidÕ), contain thesame genetic material in the form of RNA or ribonucleic acid, andboth are found in Ôviral cell culturesÕ with damaged or dying cells.James Hildreth MD, President and Chief Executive O.cer of theMeharry Medical College at Johns Hopkins, said: ÔThe virus is fullyan exosome in every sense of the word.Õ KaufmanÕs conclusion wasthat there is no ÔvirusÕ: ÔThis entire pandemic is a completelymanufactured crisis É there is no evidence of anyone dying from[this] illness.Õ Dr Tom Cowan and Sally Fallon Morell, authors of The Contagion Myth, published a statement with Dr Kaufman inFebruary, 2021, explaining why the ÔvirusÕ does not exist and you canread it that in full in the Appendix.
ÔVirusÕ theory can be traced to the Ôcell theoryÕ in 1858 of Germanphysician Rudolf Virchow (1821-1920) who contended that diseaseoriginates from a single cell inÞltrated by a ÔvirusÕ. Dr Stefan Lankasaid that Þndings and insights with respect to the structure, functionand central importance of tissues in the creation of life, which werealready known in 1858, comprehensively refute the cell theory.Virchow ignored them. We have seen the part later played by JohnEnders in the 1950s and Lanka notes that infection theories wereonly established as a global dogma through the policies andeugenics of the Third Reich in Nazi Germany (creation of the sameSabbatian cult behind the ÔCovidÕ hoax). Lanka said: ÔBefore 1933,scientists dared to contradict this theory; aer 1933, these criticalscientists were silencedÕ. Dr Tom CowanÕs view is that ill-heath iscaused by too much of something, too litoxiÞcation from chemicals and radiation Ð not contagion. We mustalso highlight as a major source of the ÔvirusÕ theology a man stillcalled the ÔFather of Modern VirologyÕ Ð Thomas Milton Rivers(1888-1962). There is no way given the CultÕs long game policy that itwas a coincidence for the ÔFather of Modern VirologyÕ to be directorof the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research from 1937 to 1956when he is credited with making the Rockefeller Institute a leader inÔviral researchÕ. Cult Rockefellers were the force behind the creationof Big Pharma ÔmedicineÕ, established the World HealthOrganisation in 1948, and have long and close associations with theGates family that now runs the WHO during the pandemic hoaxthrough mega-rich Cult gofer and psychopath Bill Gates.
Only a Renegade Mind can see through all this bullshit by askingthe questions that need to be answered, not taking ÔnoÕ orprevarication for an answer, and certainly not hiding from the truthin fear of speaking it. Renegade Minds have always changed theworld for the bebleak it may currently appear to be.
CHAPTER SIX 
Sequence of deceit 
If you tell the truth, you donÕt have to remember anything 
Mark Twain 
Against the background that I have laid out this far the sequencethat took us from an invented ÔvirusÕ in Cult-owned China inlate 2019 to the fascist transformation of human society can be seenand understood in a whole new context.
We were told that a deadly disease had broken out in Wuhan andthe world media began its campaign (coordinated by behaviouralpsychologists as we shall see) to terrify the population intounquestioning compliance. We were shown images of Chinesepeople collapsing in the street which never happened in the Westwith what was supposed to be the same condition. In the earliestdays when alleged cases and deaths were few the fear register washysterical in many areas of the media and this would expand intothe common media narrative across the world. The real story wasrather di.erent, but we were never told that. The Chinesegovernment, one of the CultÕs biggest centres of global operation,said they had discovered a new illness with ßu-like and pneumonia-type symptoms in a city with such toxic air that it is overwhelmedwith ßu-like symptoms, pneumonia and respiratory disease. Chinesescientists said it was a new Ð ÔnovelÕ Ð coronavirus which they calledSars-Cov-2 and that it caused a disease they labelled ÔCovid-19Õ.There was no evidence for this and the ÔvirusÕ has never to this daybeen isolated, puriÞed and its genetic code established from that. Itwas from the beginning a computer-generated Þction. Stories ofChinese whistleblowers saying the number of deaths was beingsupressed or that the Ônew diseaseÕ was related to the Wuhan bio-labmisdirected mainstream and alternative media into cul-de-sacs toobscure the real truth Ð there was no ÔvirusÕ.
Chinese scientists took genetic material from the lung ßuid of justa few people and said they had found a ÔnewÕ disease when thismaterial had a wide range of content. There was no evidence for aÔvirusÕ for the very reasons explained in the last two chapters. TheÔvirusÕ has never been shown to (a) exist and (b) cause any disease.People were diagnosed on symptoms that are so widespread inWuhan and polluted China and with a PCR test that canÕt detectinfectious disease. On this farce the whole global scam was sold tothe rest of the world which would also diagnose respiratory diseaseas ÔCovid-19Õ from symptoms alone or with a PCR test not testing fora ÔvirusÕ. Flu miraculously disappeared worldwide in 2020 and into2021 as it was redesignated ÔCovid-19Õ. It was really the same old ßuwith its Ôßu-likeÕ symptoms asame time with very few exceptions the Chinese response ofdraconian lockdown and fascism was the chosen weapon to respondacross the West as recommended by the Cult-owned Tedros at theCult-owned World Health Organization run by the Cult-ownedGates. All was going according to plan. Chinese scientists Ðeverything in China is controlled by the Cult-owned government Ðcompared their contaminated RNA lung-ßuid material with otherRNA sequences and said it appeared to be just under 80 percentidentical to the SARS-CoV-1 ÔvirusÕ claimed to be the cause of theSARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) ÔoutbreakÕ in 2003. Theydecreed that because of this the Ônew virusÕ had to be related andthey called it SARS-CoV-2. There are some serious problems withthis assumption and assumption was all it was. Most ÔfactualÕ scienceturns out to be assumptions repeated into everyone-knows-that. Amatch of under 80-percent is meaningless. Dr Kaufman makes thepoint that thereÕs a 96 percent genetic correlation between humansand chimpanzees, but Ôno one would say our genetic material is partof the chimpanzee familyÕ. Yet the Chinese authorities were claimingthat a much lower percentage, less than 80 percent, proved theexistence of a new ÔcoronavirusÕ. For goodness sake human DNA is60 percent similar to a banana.
You are feeling sleepy 
The entire ÔCovidÕ hoax is a global Psyop, a psychological operationto program the human mind into believing and fearing a completefantasy. A crucial aspect of this was what appeared to happen in Italy.It was all very well streaming out daily images of an allegedcatastrophe in Wuhan, but to the Western mind it was still on theother side of the world in a very di.erent culture and sereaction of Ôthis could happen to me and my familyÕ was still nothinglike as intense enough for the mind-doctors. The Cult needed aWestern example to push people over that edge and it chose Italy,one of its major global locations going back to the Roman Empire.An Italian ÔCovidÕ crisis was manufactured in a particular area calledLombardy which just happens to be notorious for its toxic air andtherefore respiratory disease. Wuhan, China, dŽjˆ vu. An hystericalmedia told horror stories of Italians dying from ÔCovidÕ in theirdroves and how Lombardy hospitals were being overrun by a tidalwave of desperately ill people needing treatment abeing struckdown by the Ôdeadly virusÕ. Here was the psychological turningpoint the Cult had planned. Wow, if this is happening in Italy, theWestern mind concluded, this indeed could happen to me and myfamily. Another point is that Italian authorities responded byfollowing the Chinese blueprint so vehemently recommended by theCult-owned World Health Organization. They imposed fascisticlockdowns on the whole country viciously policed with the help ofsurveillance drones sweeping through the streets seeking out anyonewho escaped from mass house arrest. Livelihoods were destroyedand psychology unravelled in the way we have witnessed since in alllockdown countries. Crucial to the plan was that Italy responded inthis way to set the precedent of suspending freedom and imposingfascism in a ÔWestern liberal democracyÕ. I emphasised in ananimated video explanation on davidicke.com posted in the summerof 2020 how important it was to the Cult to expand the Chineselockdown model across the West. Without this, and the bare-faced liethat non-symptomatic people could still transmit a ÔdiseaseÕ theydidnÕt have, there was no way locking down the whole population,sick and not sick, could be pulled o.. At just the right time and withno evidence Cult operatives and gofers claimed that people withoutsymptoms could pass on the ÔdiseaseÕ. In the name of protecting theÔvulnerableÕ like elderly people, who lockdowns would kill by thetens of thousands, we had for the Þrst time healthy people told toisolate as well as the sick. The great majority of people who testedpositive had no symptoms because there was nothing wrong withthem. It was just a trick made possible by a test not testing for theÔvirusÕ.
Months aFerguson at the Gates-funded Imperial College conÞrmed that I wasright. He didnÕt say it in those terms, naturally, but he did say it.Ferguson will enter the story shortly for his outrageously crazyÔcomputer modelsÕ that led to Britain, the United States and manyother countries following the Chinese and now Italian methods ofresponse. Put another way, following the Cult script. Ferguson saidthat SAGE, the UK governmentÕs scientiÞc advisory group which hascontrolled ÔCovidÕ policy from the start, wanted to follow theChinese lockdown model (while they all continued to work and bepaid), but they wondered if they could possibly, in FergusonÕswords, Ôget away with it in EuropeÕ. ÔGet away with itÕ? Who the helldo these moronic, arrogant people think they are? This appallingman Ferguson said that once Italy went into national lockdown theyrealised they, too, could mimic China:
ItÕs a communist one-party state, we said. We couldnÕt get away with it in Europe, we thought É and then Italy did it. And we realised we could. Behind this garbage from Ferguson is a simple fact: Doing the same as China in every country was the plan from the start and FergusonÕs ÔmodelsÕ would play a central role in achieving that. ItÕs just a coincidence, of course, and absolutely nothing to worry your little head about. 
Oops, sorry, our mistake 
Once the Italian segment of the Psyop had done the job it wasdesigned to do a very di.erent story emerged. Italian authoritiesrevealed that 99 percent of those who had Ôdied from Covid-19Õ inItaly had one, two, three, or more Ôco-morbiditiesÕ or illnesses andhealth problems that could have ended their life. The US Centers forDisease Control and Prevention (CDC) published a Þgure of 94percent for Americans dying of ÔCovidÕ while having other seriousmedical conditions Ð on average two to three (some Þve or six) otherpotential causes of death. In terms of death from an unproven ÔvirusÕI say it is 100 percent. The other one percent in Italy and six percentin the US would presumably have died from ÔCovidÕsÕ ßu-likesymptoms with a range of other possible causes in conjunction witha test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ. Fox News reported that even morestartling Þgures had emerged in one US county in which 410 of 422deaths aconditions. The Italian National Health Institute said later that theaverage age of people dying with a ÔCovid-19Õ diagnosis in Italy wasabout 81. Ninety percent were over 70 with ten percent over 90. Interms of other reasons to die some 80 percent had two or morechronic diseases with half having three or more includingcardiovascular problems, diabetes, respiratory problems and cancer.Why is the phantom ÔCovid-19Õ said to kill overwhelmingly oldpeople and hardly a.ect the young? Old people continually die ofmany causes and especially respiratory disease which you can re-diagnose ÔCovid-19Õ while young people die in tiny numbers bycomparison and rarely of respiratory disease. Old people Ôdie ofCovidÕ because they die of other things that can be redesignatedÔCovidÕ and it really is that simple.
Flu has flown 
The blueprint was in place. Get your illusory ÔcasesÕ from a test nottesting for the ÔvirusÕ and redesignate other causes of death asÔCovid-19Õ. You have an instant ÔpandemicÕ from something that isnothing more than a computer-generated Þction. With near-on abillion people having Ôßu-likeÕ symptoms every year the potentialwas limitless and we can see why ßu quickly and apparentlymiraculously disappeared worldwide by being diagnosed ÔCovid-19Õ.The painfully bloody obvious was explained away by the childlikemedia in headlines like this in the UK ÔIndependentÕ: ÔNot a singlecase of ßu detected by Public Health England this year as Covidrestrictions suppress virusÕ. I kid you not. The masking, socialdistancing and house arrest that did not make the ÔCovid virusÕdisappear somehow did so with the Ôßu virusÕ. Even worse thearticle, by a bloke called Samuel Lovemasking, sanitising and other ÔCovidÕ measures should continue tokeep the ßu away. With a ridiculousness that disturbs your breathing(itÕs ÔCovid-19Õ) the said Loveith widespread socialdistancing and mask-wearing measures in place throughout the UK,the usual routes of transmission for inßuenza have been blocked.ÕHe had absolutely no evidence to support that statement, but look atthe consequences of him acknowledging the obvious. With ßu notdisappearing at all and only being relabelled ÔCovid-19Õ he wouldhave to contemplate that ÔCovidÕ was a hoax on a scale that is hard toimagine. You need guts and commitment to truth to even go thereand thatÕs clearly something Samuel Lovee inabundance. He would never have got it through the editors anyway.
Tens of thousands die in the United States alone every winter fromßu including many with pneumonia complications. CDC Þguresrecord 45 million Americans diagnosed with ßu in 2017-2018 ofwhich 61,000 died and some reports claim 80,000. Where was thesame hysteria then that we have seen with ÔCovid-19Õ? Some 250,000Americans are admiery year withabout 50,000 cases proving fatal. About 65 million su.er respiratorydisease every year and three million deaths makes this the thirdbiggest cause of death worldwide. You only have to redesignate aportion of all these people ÔCovid-19Õ and you have an instant globalpandemic or the appearance of one. Why would doctors do this? Theyare told to do this and all but a few dare not refuse those who mustbe obeyed. Doctors in general are not researching their ownknowledge and instead take it direct and unquestioned from theauthorities that own them and their careers. The authorities say theymust now diagnose these symptoms ÔCovid-19Õ and not ßu, orwhatever, and they do it. Dark suits say put ÔCovid-19Õ on deathcertiÞcates no maRenegade Minds donÕt fall for the illusion that doctors and medicalsta. are all highly-intelligent, highly-principled, seekers of medicaltruth. Some are, but not the majority. They are repeaters, gofers, andyes sir, no sir, purveyors of what the system demands they purvey.The ÔCovidÕ con is not merely conÞned to diseases of the lungs.Instructions to doctors to put ÔCovid-19Õ on death certiÞcates foranyone dying of anything within 28 days (or much more) of apositive test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ opened the ßoodgates. Theterm dying with ÔCovidÕ and not of ÔCovidÕ was coined to cover thetruth. Whether it was a with or an of they were all added to the deathnumbers agovernments and globally by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkinsoperation in the United States that was so involved in thoseÔpandemicÕ simulations. Fraudulent deaths were added to the ever-growing list of fraudulent ÔcasesÕ from false positives from a falsetest. No wonder Professor Walter Ricciardi, scientiÞc advisor to theItalian minister of health, said aits job that ÔCovidÕ death rates were due to Italy having the secondoldest population in the world and to how hospitals record deaths:
The way in which we code deaths in our country is very generous in the sense that all the people who die in hospitals with the coronavirus are deemed to be dying of the coronavirus. On re-evaluation by the National Institute of Health, only 12 per cent of death certificates have shown a direct causality from coronavirus, while 88 per cent of patients who have died have at least one pre-morbidity Ð many had two or three. 
This is extraordinary enough when you consider the propagandacampaign to use Italy to terrify the world, but how can they even saytwelve percent were genuine when the ÔvirusÕ has not been shown toexist, its ÔcodeÕ is a computer program, and diagnosis comes from atest not testing for it? As in China, and soon the world, ÔCovid-19Õ inItaly was a redesignation of diagnosis. Lies and corruption were tobecome the real ÔpandemicÕ fuelled by a pathetically-compliantmedical system taking its orders from the tiny few at the top of theirnational hierarchy who answered to the World Health Organizationwhich answers to Gates and the Cult. Doctors were told Ð ordered Ðto diagnose a particular set of symptoms ÔCovid-19Õ and put that onthe death certiÞcate for any cause of death if the patient had testedpositive with a test not testing for the virus or had ÔCovidÕ symptomslike the ßu. The United States even introduced big Þnancialincentives to manipulate the Þgures with hospitals receiving £4,600from the Medicare system for diagnosing someone with regularpneumonia, $13,000 if they made the diagnosis from the samesymptoms ÔCovid-19Õ pneumonia, and $39, 000 if they put a ÔCovidÕdiagnosed patient on a ventilator that would almost certainly killthem. A few Ð painfully and pathetically few Ð medicalwhistleblowers revealed (before Cult-owned YouTube deleted theirvideos) that they had been instructed to Ôlet the patient crashÕ andput them straight on a ventilator instead of going through a series offar less intrusive and dangerous methods as they would have donebefore the pandemic hoax began and the Þnancial incentives kickedin. We are talking cold-blooded murder given that ventilators are sodamaging to respiratory systems they are usually the last step beforeheaven awaits. Renegade Minds never fall for the belief that peoplein white coats are all angels of mercy and cannot be full-onpsychopaths. I have explained in detail in The Answer how what I amdescribing here played out across the world coordinated by theWorld Health Organization through the medical hierarchies inalmost every country.
Medical scientist calls it 
Information about the non-existence of the ÔvirusÕ began to emergefor me in late March, 2020, and mushroomed aas sent anemail by Sir Julian Rose, a writer, researcher, and organic farmingpromotor, from a medical scientist friend of his in the United States.Even at that early stage in March the scientist was able to explainhow the ÔCovidÕ hoax was being manipulated. He said there were noreliable tests for a speciÞc ÔCovid-19 virusÕ and nor were there anyreliable agencies or media outlets for reporting numbers of actualÔCovid-19Õ cases. We have seen in the long period since then that hewas absolutely right. ÔEvery action and reaction to Covid-19 is basedon totally ßawed data and we simply cannot make accurateassessments,Õ he said. Most people diagnosed with ÔCovid-19Õ wereshowing nothing more than cold and ßu-like symptoms Ôbecausemost coronavirus strains are nothing more than cold/ßu-likesymptomsÕ. We had farcical situations like an 84-year-old Germanman testing positive for ÔCovid-19Õ and his nursing home ordered toquarantine only for him to be found to have a common cold. Thescientist described back then why PCR tests and what he called theÔMickey Mouse test kitsÕ were useless for what they were claimed tobe identifying. ÔThe idea these kits can isolate a speciÞc virus likeCovid-19 is nonsense,Õ he said. SigniÞcantly, he pointed out that Ôifyou want to create a totally false panic about a totally false pandemic
Ð pick a coronavirusÕ. This is exactly what the Cult-owned Gates,World Economic Forum and Johns Hopkins University did withtheir Event 201 ÔsimulationÕ followed by their real-life simulationcalled the ÔpandemicÕ. The scientist said that all you had to do wasselect the sickest of people with respiratory-type diseases in a singlelocation Ð Ôsay WuhanÕ Ð and administer PCR tests to them. You canthen claim that anyone showing Ôviral sequencesÕ similar to acoronavirus Ôwhich will inevitably be quite a fewÕ is su.ering from aÔnewÕ disease:
Since you already selected the sickest flu cases a fairly high proportion of your sample will go on to die. You can then say this ÔnewÕ virus has a CFR [case fatality rate] higher than the flu and use this to infuse more concern and do more tests which will of course produce more ÔcasesÕ, which expands the testing, which produces yet more ÔcasesÕ and so on and so on. Before long you have your ÔpandemicÕ, and all you have done is use a simple test kit trick to convert the worst flu and pneumonia cases into something new that doesnÕt ACTUALLY EXIST [my emphasis]. 
He said that you then Ôjust run the same scam in other countriesÕand make sure to keep the fear message running high Ôso that people
will feel panicky and less able to think criticallyÕ. The only problemto overcome was the fact there is no actual new deadly pathogen andonly regular sick people. This meant that deaths from the Ônewdeadly pathogenÕ were going to be way too low for a real newdeadly virus pandemic, but he said this could be overcome in thefollowing ways Ð all of which would go on to happen:
1.
 You can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are imminent [you underpin thiswith fantasy Ôcomputer projectionsÕ]. Use this as an excuse to quarantine everyone and thenclaim the quarantine prevented the expected millions of dead.

2.
 You can [say that people] ÔminimizingÕ the dangers are irresponsible and bully them intonot talking about numbers.

3.
 You can talk crap about made up numbers hoping to blind people with pseudoscience.

4.
 You can start testing well people (who, of course, will also likely have shreds ofcoronavirus [RNA] in them) and thus inßate your Ôcase ÞguresÕ with ÔasymptomaticcarriersÕ (you will of course have to spin that to sound deadly even though any virologistknows the more symptom-less cases you have the less deadly is your pathogen).


The scientist said that if you take these simple steps Ôyou can haveyour own entirely manufactured pandemic up and running inweeksÕ. His analysis made so early in the hoax was brilliantlyprophetic of what would actually unfold. Pulling all the informationtogether in these recent chapters we have this is simple 1, 2, 3, ofhow you can delude virtually the entire human population intobelieving in a ÔvirusÕ that doesnÕt exist:
¥
A ÔCovid caseÕ is someone who tests positive with a test nottesting for the ÔvirusÕ.

¥
A ÔCovid deathÕ is someone who dies of any cause within 28 days(or much longer) of testing positive with a test not testing for theÔvirus.

¥
Asymptomatic means there is nothing wrong with you, but theyclaim you can pass on what you donÕt have to justify locking


down (quarantining) healthy people in totality.
The foundations of the hoax are that simple. A study involving tenmillion people in Wuhan, published in November, 2020, demolishedthe whole lie about those without symptoms passing on the ÔvirusÕ.They found Ô300 asymptomatic casesÕ and traced their contacts toÞnd that not one of them was detected with the ÔvirusÕ.ÔAsymptomaticÕ patients and their contacts were isolated for no lessthan two weeks and nothing changed. I know itÕs all crap, but if youare going to claim that those without symptoms can transmit ÔthevirusÕ then you must produce evidence for that and they never have.Even World Health Organization o.cial Dr Maria Van Kerkhove,head of the emerging diseases and zoonosis unit, said as early asJune, 2020, that she doubted the validity of asymptomatictransmission. She said that Ôfrom the data we have, it still seems tobe rare that an asymptomatic person actually transmits onward to asecondary individualÕ and by ÔrareÕ she meant that she couldnÕt citeany case of asymptomatic transmission.
The Ferguson factor 
The problem for the Cult as it headed into March, 2020, when thescript had lockdown due to start, was that despite all themanipulation of the case and death Þgures they still did not haveenough people alleged to have died from ÔCovidÕ to justify masshouse arrest. This was overcome in the way the scientist described:ÔYou can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths areimminent É Use this as an excuse to quarantine everyone and thenclaim the quarantine prevented the expected millions of dead.Õ Enterone Professor Neil Ferguson, the Gates-funded ÔepidemiologistÕ atthe Gates-funded Imperial College in London. Ferguson is BritainÕsChristian Drosten in that he has a dire record of predicting healthoutcomes, but is still called upon to advise government on the nexthealth outcome when another ÔcrisisÕ comes along. This may seem tobe a strange and ridiculous thing to do. Why would you keepturning for policy guidance to people who have a history of beingmonumentally wrong? Ah, but it makes sense from the Cult point ofview. These ÔexpertsÕ keep on producing predictions that suit theCult agenda for societal transformation and so it was with NeilFerguson as he revealed his horriÞc (and clearly insane) computermodel predictions that allowed lockdowns to be imposed in Britain,the United States and many other countries. Ferguson does not haveeven an A-level in biology and would appear to have no formaltraining in computer modelling, medicine or epidemiology,according to Derek Winton, an MSc in Computational Intelligence.He wrote an article somewhat aghast at what Ferguson did whichincluded taking no account of respiratory disease ÔseasonalityÕ whichmeans it is far worse in the winter months. Who would have thoughtthat respiratory disease could be worse in the winter? Well, certainlynot Ferguson.
The massively China-connected Imperial College and its bizarreprofessor provided the excuse for the long-incubated Chinese modelof human control to travel westward at lightning speed. ImperialCollege conÞrms on its website that it collaborates with the ChineseResearch Institute; publishes more than 600 research papers everyyear with Chinese research institutions; has 225 Chinese sta.; 2,600Chinese students Ð the biggest international group; 7,000 formerstudents living in China which is the largest group outside the UK;and was selected for a tour by ChinaÕs President Xi Jinping duringhis state visit to the UK in 2015. The college takes major donationsfrom China and describes itself as the UKÕs number one universitycollaborator with Chinese research institutions. The Chinacommunist/fascist government did not appear phased by the woefulpredictions of Ferguson and Imperial when during the lockdownthat Ferguson induced the college signed a Þve-year collaborationdeal with China tech giant Huawei that will have HuaweiÕs indoor5G network equipment installed at the collegeÕs West London techcampus along with an ÔAI cloud platformÕ. The deal includes Chinesesponsorship of ImperialÕs Venture Catalyst entrepreneurshipcompetition. Imperial is an example of the enormous inßuence theChinese government has within British and North Americanuniversities and research centres Ð and further aÞeld. Up to 200academics from more than a dozen UK universities are beinginvestigated on suspicion of ÔunintentionallyÕ helping the Chinesegovernment build weapons of mass destruction by Ôtransferringworld-leading research in advanced military technology such asaircraeaponsÕ. Similar scandals havebroken in the United States, but itÕs all a coincidence. ImperialCollege serves the agenda in many other ways including thepromotion of every aspect of the United Nations Agenda 21/2030(the Great Reset) and produced computer models to show thathuman-caused Ôclimate changeÕ is happening when in the real worldit isnÕt. Imperial College is driving the climate agenda as it drives theÔCovidÕ agenda (both Cult hoaxes) while Patrick Vallance, the UKgovernmentÕs Chief ScientiÞc Adviser on ÔCovidÕ, was named ChiefScientiÞc Adviser to the UN Ôclimate changeÕ conference known asCOP26 hosted by the government in Glasgow, Scotland. ÔCovidÕ andÔclimateÕ are fundamentally connected.
Professor Woeful 
From ImperialÕs bosom came Neil Ferguson still advisinggovernment despite his previous disasters and it was announcedearly on that he and other key people like UK Chief Medical AdviserChris Whiasbeing sold. Somehow they managed to survive and we had PrimeMinister Boris Johnson admias said to bea severe version of the ÔvirusÕ in this same period. His whole policyand demeanour changed when he returned to Downing Street. ItÕs asmall world with these government advisors Ð especially in theircommunal connections to Gates Ð and Ferguson had partnered withWhiough choices toreduce Ebola transmissionÕ which involved another scare-story thatdidnÕt happen. FergusonÕs ÔmodelsÕ predicted that up to150, 000could die from Ômad cow diseaseÕ, or BSE, and its version in sheep ifit was transmias not transmitriggered by an organophosphate pesticide used to treat a pest oncows. Fewer than 200 deaths followed from the human form. Modelsby Ferguson and his fellow incompetents led to the unnecessaryculling of millions of pigs, caoutbreak in 2001 which destroyed the lives and livelihoods offarmers and their families who had otheir herds and ßocks. Vast numbers of these animals did not havefoot and mouth and had no contact with the infection. AnotherÔexpertÕ behind the cull was Professor Roy Anderson, a computermodeller at Imperial College specialising in the epidemiology ofhuman, not animal, disease. Anderson has served on the Bill andMelinda Gates Grand Challenges in Global Health advisory boardand chairs another Gates-funded organisation. Gates is everywhere.
In a precursor to the ÔCovidÕ script Ferguson backed closingschools Ôfor prolonged periodsÕ over the swine ßu ÔpandemicÕ in 2009and said it would a.ect a third of the world population if itcontinued to spread at the speed he claimed to be happening. Hismates at Imperial College said much the same and a news reportsaid: ÔOne of the authors, the epidemiologist and disease modellerNeil Ferguson, who sits on the World Health OrganisationÕsemergency commipandemic potentialÓ.Õ Professor Liam Donaldson, the Chris Whiof his day as Chief Medical O.cer, said the worst case could see 30percent of the British people infected by swine ßu with 65,000 dying.Ferguson and Donaldson were indeed proved correct when at theend of the year the number of deaths aas 392.The term ÔexpertÕ is rather liberally applied unfortunately, not leastto complete idiots. Swine ßu ÔprojectionsÕ were great forGlaxoSmithKline (GSK) as millions rolled in for its Pandemrixinßuenza vaccine which led to brain damage with children mosta.ected. The British government (taxpayers) paid out more than £60million in compensation aas given immunity fromprosecution. Yet another ÔCovidÕ dŽjˆ vu. Swine ßu was supposed tohave broken out in Mexico, but Dr Wolfgang Wodarg, a Germandoctor, former member of parliament and critic of the ÔCovidÕ hoax,observed Ôthe spread of swine ßuÕ in Mexico City at the time. Hesaid: ÔWhat we experienced in Mexico City was a very mild ßuwhich did not kill more than usual Ð which killed even fewer peoplethan usual.Õ Hyping the fear against all the facts is not unique toÔCovidÕ and has happened many times before. Ferguson is reportedto have over-estimated the projected death toll of bird ßu (H5N1) bysome three million-fold, but bird ßu vaccine makers again made akilling from the scare. This is some of the background to the NeilFerguson who produced the perfectly-timed computer models inearly 2020 predicting that half a million people would die in Britainwithout draconian lockdown and 2.2 million in the United States.Politicians panicked, people panicked, and lockdowns of allegedshort duration were instigated to ÔßaeÕ of cases gleanedfrom a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ. I said at the time that the publiccould forget the Ôshort durationÕ bit. This was an agenda to destroythe livelihoods of the population and force them into mass controlthrough dependency and there was going to be nothing ÔshortÕ aboutit. American researcher Daniel Horowitz described the consequencesof the ÔmodelsÕ spewed out by Gates-funded Ferguson and ImperialCollege:
What led our government and the governments of many other countries into panic was a single Imperial College of UK study, funded by global warming activists, that predicted 2.2 million deaths if we didnÕt lock down the country. In addition, the reported 8-9% death rate in Italy scared us into thinking there was some other mutation of this virus that they got, which might have come here. 
Together with the fact that we were finally testing and had the ability to actually report new cases, we thought we were headed for a death spiral. But again É we canÕt flatten a curve if we donÕt know when the curve started. 
How about it never started?
Giving them what they want 
An investigation by German news outlet Welt Am Sonntag (World on Sunday) revealed how in March, 2020, the German governmentgathered together Ôleading scientists from several research institutesand universitiesÕ and Ôtogether, they were to produce a [modelling]paper that would serve as legitimization for further tough politicalmeasuresÕ. The Cult agenda was justiÞed by computer modelling notbased on evidence or reality; it was speciÞcally constructed to justifythe Cult demand for lockdowns all over the world to destroy theindependent livelihoods of the global population. All thesemodellers and everyone responsible for the ÔCovidÕ hoax have a datewith a trial like those in Nuremberg aorld War Two whenNazis faced the consequences of their war crimes. These corrupt-beyond-belief ÔmodellersÕ wrote the paper according to governmentinstructions and it said that that if lockdown measures were lithen up to one million Germans would die from ÔCovid-19Õ addingthat some would die Ôagonizingly at home, gasping for breathÕunable to be treated by hospitals that couldnÕt cope. All lies. Nomae the Cult all that it wanted. What did long-timegovernment ÔmodellerÕ Neil Ferguson say? If the UK and the UnitedStates didnÕt lockdown half a million would die in Britain and 2.2million Americans. Anyone see a theme here? ÔModellersÕ are such acrucial part of the lockdown strategy that we should look into theirbackground and follow the money. Researcher Rosemary Freiproduced an excellent article headlined ÔThe Modelling-paperMaÞosiÕ. She highlights a guy called John Edmunds, a Britishepidemiologist, and professor in the Faculty of Epidemiology andPopulation Health at the London School of Hygiene & TropicalMedicine. He studied at Imperial College. Edmunds is a member ofgovernment ÔCovidÕ advisory bodies which have been dictatingpolicy, the New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats AdvisoryGroup (NERVTAG) and the ScientiÞc Advisory Group forEmergencies (SAGE).
Ferguson, another member of NERVTAG and SAGE, led the waywith the original ÔvirusÕ and Edmunds has followed in the ÔvariantÕstage and especially the so-called UK or Kent variant known as theÔVariant of ConcernÕ (VOC) B.1.1.7. He said in a co-writhe Centre for Mathematical modelling of Infectious Diseases at theLondon School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, with input fromthe CentreÕs ÔCovid-19Õ Working Group, that there was Ôa realisticpossibility that VOC B.1.1.7 is associated with an increased risk ofdeath compared to non-VOC virusesÕ. Fear, fear, fear, get thevaccine, fear, fear, fear, get the vaccine. Rosemary Frei reveals thatalmost all the paperÕs authors and members of the modelling centreÕsÔCovid-19Õ Working Group receive funding from the Bill andMelinda Gates Foundation and/or the associated Gates-fundedWellcome Trust. The paper was published by e-journal Medr .iv which only publishes papers not peer-reviewed and the journal wasestablished by an organisation headed by FacebookÕs MarkZuckerberg and his missus. What a small world it is. Frei discoveredthat Edmunds is on the ScientiÞc Advisory Board of the Coalition forEpidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) which was establishedby the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Klaus SchwabÕs DavosWorld Economic Forum and Big Pharma giant Wellcome. CEPI wasÔlaunched in Davos [in 2017] to develop vaccines to stop futureepidemicsÕ, according to its website. ÔOur mission is to accelerate thedevelopment of vaccines against emerging infectious diseases andenable equitable access to these vaccines for people duringoutbreaks.Õ What kind people they are. Rosemary Frei reveals thatPublic Health England (PHE) director Susan Hopkins is an author ofher organisationÕs non-peer-reviewed reports on Ônew variantsÕ.Hopkins is a professor of infectious diseases at LondonÕs ImperialCollege which is gidollars a year by the Billand Melinda Gates Foundation. Gates-funded modelling disasterNeil Ferguson also co-authors Public Health England reports and hespoke in December, 2020, about the potential danger of the B.1.1.7.ÔUK variantÕ promoted by Gates-funded modeller John Edmunds.When I come to the ÔCovid vaccinesÕ the Ônew variantsÕ will beshown for what they are Ð bollocks.
Connections, connections 
All these people and modellers are lockdown-obsessed or, putanother way, they demand what the Cult demands. Edmunds said inJanuary, 2021, that to ease lockdowns too soon would be a disasterand they had to Ôvaccinate much, much, much more widely than theelderlyÕ. Rosemary Frei highlights that Edmunds is married toJeanne Pimenta who is described in a LinkedIn proÞle as director ofepidemiology at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and she held shares in thecompany. Patrick Vallance, co-chair of SAGE and the governmentÕsChief ScientiÞc Adviser, is a former executive of GSK and has adeferred bonus of shares in the company worth £600,000. GSK hasserious business connections with Bill Gates and is collaboratingwith mRNA-ÕvaccineÕ company CureVac to make ÔvaccinesÕ for thenew variants that Edmunds is talking about. GSK is planning aÔCovid vaccineÕ with drug giant SanoÞ. Puppet Prime Minister BorisJohnson announced in the spring of 2021 that up to 60 millionvaccine doses were to be made at the GSK facility at Barnard Castlein the English North East. Barnard Castle, with a population of just6,000, was famously visited in breach of lockdown rules in April,2020, by Johnson aide Dominic Cummings who said that he drovethere Ôto test his eyesightÕ before driving back to London. Cummingswould be beould takelong. The GSK facility had nothing to do with his visit then althoughIÕm sure Patrick Vallance would have been happy to arrange anintroduction and some tea and biscuits. Ruthless psychopath Gateshas made yet another fortune from vaccines in collaboration with BigPharma companies and gushes at the phenomenal proÞts to be madefrom vaccines Ð more than a 20-to-1 return as he told oneinterviewer. Gates also tweeted in December, 2019, with theforeknowledge of what was coming: ÔWhatÕs next for ourfoundation? IÕm particularly excited about what the next year couldmean for one of the best buys in global health: vaccines.Õ
Modeller John Edmunds is a big promotor of vaccines as all thesepeople appear to be. HeÕs the dean of the London School of Hygiene& Tropical MedicineÕs Faculty of Epidemiology and PopulationHealth which is primarily funded by the Bill and Melinda GatesFoundation and the Gates-established and funded GAVI vaccinealliance which is the Gates vehicle to vaccinate the world. Theorganisation Doctors Without Borders has described GAVI as beingÔaimed more at supporting drug-industry desires to promote newproducts than at Þnding the most e.cient and sustainable means forÞghting the diseases of povertyÕ. But then thatÕs why the psychopathGates created it. John Edmunds said in a video that the LondonSchool of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine is involved in every aspect ofvaccine development including large-scale clinical trials. Hecontends that mathematical modelling can show that vaccinesprotect individuals and society. ThatÕs on the basis of shit in and shitout, I take it. Edmunds serves on the UK Vaccine Network as doesFerguson and the governmentÕs foremost ÔCovidÕ adviser, the grim-faced, dark-eyed Chris Whi. The Vaccine Network says it worksÔto support the government to identify and shortlist targetedinvestment opportunities for the most promising vaccines andvaccine technologies that will help combat infectious diseases withepidemic potential, and to address structural issues related to theUKÕs broader vaccine infrastructureÕ. Ferguson is acting Director ofthe Imperial College Vaccine Impact Modelling Consortium whichhas funding from the Bill and Melina Gates Foundation and theGates-created GAVI Ôvaccine allianceÕ. Anyone wonder why thesecharacters see vaccines as the answer to every problem? Ferguson iswildly enthusiastic in his support for GAVIÕs campaign to vaccinechildren en masse in poor countries. You would expect someone likeGates who has constantly talked about the need to reduce thepopulation to want to fund vaccines to keep more people alive. IÕmsure thatÕs why he does it. The John Edmunds London School ofHygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) has a VaccinesManufacturing Innovation Centre which develops, tests andcommercialises vaccines. Rosemary Frei writes:
The vaccines centre also performs affiliated activities like combating Ôvaccine hesitancyÕ. The latter includes the Vaccine Confidence Project. The projectÕs stated purpose is, among other things, Ôto provide analysis and guidance for early response and engagement with the public to ensure sustained confidence in vaccines and immunisationÕ. The Vaccine Confidence ProjectÕs director is LSHTM professor Heidi Larson. For more than a decade sheÕs been researching how to combat vaccine hesitancy. 
How the bloody hell can blokes like John Edmunds and NeilFerguson with those connections and Þnancial ties model ÔvirusÕ case
and death projections for the government and especially in a waythat gives their paymasters like Gates exactly what they want? ItÕsinsane, but this is what you Þnd throughout the world.
ÔCovidÕ is not dangerous, oops, wait, yes it is 
Only days before FergusonÕs nightmare scenario made JackbootJohnson take Britain into a China-style lockdown to save us from adeadly ÔvirusÕ the UK government website gov.uk was reportingsomething very di.erent to Ferguson on a page of o.cialgovernment guidance for Ôhigh consequence infectious diseases(HCID)Õ. It said this about ÔCovid-19Õ:
As of 19 March 2020, COVID-19 is no longer considered to be a high consequence infectious diseases (HCID) in the UK [my emphasis]. The 4 nations public health HCID group made an interim recommendation in January 2020 to classify COVID-19 as an HCID. This was based on consideration of the UK HCID criteria about the virus and the disease with information available during the early stages of the outbreak. 
Now that more is known about COVID-19, the public health bodies in the UK have reviewed the most up to date information about COVID-19 against the UK HCID criteria. They have determined that several features have now changed; in particular, more information is available about mortality rates (low overall), and there is now greater clinical awareness and a specific and sensitive laboratory test, the availability of which continues to increase. The Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) is also of the opinion that COVID-19 should no longer be classified as an HCID. 
Soon aernment had been exposed for downgrading therisk they upgraded it again and everyone was back to singing fromthe same Cult hymn book. Ferguson and his fellow Gates clonesindicated that lockdowns and restrictions would have to continueuntil a Gates-funded vaccine was developed. Gates said the samebecause Ferguson and his like were repeating the Gates script whichis the Cult script. ÔFlaeÕ became an ongoing nightmare ofcontinuing lockdowns with periods in between of severe restrictionsin pursuit of destroying independent incomes and had nothing to dowith protecting health about which the Cult gives not a shit. WhywouldnÕt Ferguson be pushing a vaccine ÔsolutionÕ when heÕs ownedby vaccine-obsessive Gates who makes a fortune from them andwhen Ferguson heads the Vaccine Impact Modelling Consortium atImperial College funded by the Gates Foundation and GAVI, theÔvaccine allianceÕ, created by Gates as his personal vaccinepromotion operation? To compound the human catastrophe thatFergusonÕs ÔmodelsÕ did so much to create he was later exposed forbreaking his own lockdown rules by having sexual liaisons with hismarried girlfriend Antonia Staats at his home while she was living atanother location with her husband and children. Staats was aÔclimateÕ activist and senior campaigner at the Soros-funded Avaazwhich I wouldnÕt trust to tell me that grass is green. Ferguson had toresign as a government advisor over this hypocrisy in May, 2020, butaas back being quoted by the ridiculousmedia on the need for more lockdowns and a vaccine rollout. Othergovernment-advising ÔscientistsÕ from Imperial CollegeÕ held the fortin his absence and said lockdown could be indeÞnite until a vaccinewas found. The Cult script was being sung by the payrolled choir. Isaid there was no intention of going back to ÔnormalÕ when theÔvaccineÕ came because the ÔvaccineÕ is part of a very di.erent agendathat I will discuss in Human 2.0. Why would the Cult want to let theworld go back to normal when destroying that normal forever wasthe whole point of what was happening? House arrest, closingbusinesses and schools through lockdown, (un)social distancing andmasks all followed the Ferguson fantasy models. Again as Ipredicted (these people are so predictable) when the ÔvaccineÕarrived we were told that house arrest, lockdown, (un)socialdistancing and masks would still have to continue. I will deal withthe masks in the next chapter because they are of fundamentalimportance.
WhereÕs the ÔpandemicÕ? 
Any mildly in-depth assessment of the Þgures revealed what wasreally going on. Cult-funded and controlled organisations still havegenuine people working within them such is the number involved.So it is with Genevieve Briand, assistant program director of theApplied Economics masterÕs degree program at Johns HopkinsUniversity. She analysed the impact that ÔCovid-19Õ had on deathsfrom all causes in the United States using o.cial data from the CDCfor the period from early February to early September, 2020. Shefound that allegedly ÔCovidÕ related-deaths exceeded those fromheart disease which she found strange with heart disease always thebiggest cause of fatalities. Her research became even more signiÞcantwhen she noted the sudden decline in 2020 of all non-ÕCovidÕ deaths:ÔThis trend is completely contrary to the paed in allprevious years É the total decrease in deaths by other causes almostexactly equals the increase in deaths by Covid-19.Õ This was such agame, set and match in terms of what was happening that JohnsHopkins University deleted the article on the grounds that it Ôwasbeing used to support false and dangerous inaccuracies about theimpact of the pandemicÕ. No Ð because it exposed the scam fromo.cial CDC Þgures and this was conÞrmed when those Þgures werepublished in January, 2021. Here we can see the e.ect of peopledying from heart a, road accidents and gunshotwounds Ð anything Ð having ÔCovid-19Õ on the death certiÞcate alongwith those diagnosed from ÔsymptomsÕ who had even not testedpositive with a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ. I am not kidding withthe gunshot wounds, by the way. Brenda Bock, coroner in GrandCounty, Colorado, revealed that two gunshot victims tested positivefor the ÔvirusÕ within the previous 30 days and were thereforeclassiÞed as ÔCovid deathsÕ. Bock said: ÔThese two people had testedpositive for Covid, but thatÕs not what killed them. A gunshotwound is what killed them.Õ She said she had not even Þnished herinvestigation when the state listed the gunshot victims as deaths dueto the ÔvirusÕ. The death and case Þgures for ÔCovid-19Õ are anabsolute joke and yet they are repeated like parrots by the media,politicians and alleged medical ÔexpertsÕ. The o.cial Cult narrativeis the only show in town.
Genevieve Briand found that deaths from all causes were notexceptional in 2020 compared with previous years and a Spanishmagazine published Þgures that said the same about Spain whichwas a ÔCovidÕ propaganda hotspot at one point. Discovery Salud, ahealth and medicine magazine, quoted government Þgures whichshowed how 17,000 fewer people died in Spain in 2020 than in 2019and more than 26,000 fewer than in 2018. The age-standardisedmortality rate for England and Wales when age distribution is takeninto account was signiÞcantly lower in 2020 than the 1970s, 80s and90s, and was only the ninth highest since 2000. Where is theÔpandemicÕ?
Post mortems and autopsies virtually disappeared for ÔCovidÕdeaths amid claims that Ôvirus-infectedÕ bodily ßuids posed a risk tothose carrying out the autopsy. This was rejected by renownedGerman pathologist and forensic doctor Klaus PŸschel who said thathe and his sta. had by then done 150 autopsies on ÔCovidÕ patientswith no problems at all. He said they were needed to know whysome ÔCovidÕ patients su.ered blood clots and not severe respiratoryinfections. The ÔvirusÕ is, aere acuterespiratory syndromeÕ. I highlighted in the spring of 2020 thisphenomenon and quoted New York intensive care doctor CameronKyle-Sidell who posted a soon deleted YouTube video to say thatthey had been told to prepare to treat an infectious disease calledÔCovid-19Õ, but that was not what they were dealing with. Instead helikened the lung condition of the most severely ill patients to whatyou would expect with cabin depressurisation in a plane at 30,000feet or someone dropped on the top of Everest without oxygen oracclimatisation. I have never said this is not happening to a smallminority of alleged ÔCovidÕ patients Ð I am saying this is not causedby a phantom Ôcontagious virusÕ. Indeed Kyle-Sidell said thatÔCovid-19Õ was not the disease they were told was coming their way.ÔWe are operating under a medical paradigm that is untrue,Õ he said,and he believed they were treating the wrong disease: ÔThese peopleare being slowly starved of oxygen.Õ Patients would take o. theiroxygen masks in a state of fear and stress and while they were bluein the face on the brink of death. They did not look like patientsdying of pneumonia. You can see why they donÕt want autopsieswhen their virus doesnÕt exist and there is another condition in somepeople that they donÕt wish to be uncovered. I should add here thatthe 5G system of millimetre waves was being rapidly introducedaround the world in 2020 and even more so now as they Þre 5G atthe Earth from satellites. At 60 gigahertz within the 5G range thatfrequency interacts with the oxygen molecule and stops peoplebreathing in su.cient oxygen to be absorbed into the bloodstream.They are installing 5G in schools and hospitals. The world is notmad or anything. 5G can cause major changes to the lungs and bloodas I detail in The Answer and these consequences are labelled ÔCovid.19Õ, the alleged symptoms of which can be caused by 5G and otherelectromagnetic frequencies as cells respond to radiation poisoning.
The ÔCovid deathÕ scam 
Dr Sco,exposed ÔCovidÕ Medicare payment incentives to hospitals and deathcertiÞcate manipulation. He said he was sent a seven-page documentby the US Department of Health ÔcoachingÕ him on how to Þll outdeath certiÞcates which had never happened before. The documentsaid that he didnÕt need to have a laboratory test for ÔCovid-19Õ toput that on the death certiÞcate and that shocked him when deathcertiÞcates are supposed to be about facts. Jensen described howdoctors had been Ôencouraged, if not pressuredÕ to make a diagnosisof ÔCovid-19Õ if they thought it was probable or ÔpresumedÕ. Nopositive test was necessary Ð not that this would have maanyway. He said doctors were told to diagnose ÔCovidÕ by symptomswhen these were the same as colds, allergies, other respiratoryproblems, and certainly with inßuenza which ÔdisappearedÕ in theÔCovidÕ era. A common sni.e was enough to get the dreadedverdict. Ontario authorities decreed that a single care home residentwith one symptom from a long list must lead to the isolation of theentire home. Other courageous doctors like Jensen made the samepoint about death Þgure manipulation and how deaths by othercauses were falling while ÔCovid-19 deathsÕ were rising at the samerate due to re-diagnosis. Their videos rarely survive long onYouTube with its Cult-supporting algorithms courtesy of CEO SusanWojcicki and her bosses at Google. Figure-tampering was so glaringand ubiquitous that even o.cials were lesaying it. UK chief scientiÞc adviser Patrick Vallance said on oneoccasion that ÔCovidÕ on the death certiÞcate doesnÕt mean ÔCovidÕwas the cause of death (so why the hell is it there?) and we had therare sight of a BBC reporter telling the truth when she said:ÔSomeone could be successfully treated for Covid, in say April,discharged, and then in June, get run over by a bus and die É Thatperson would still be counted as a Covid death in England.Õ Yet theBBC and the rest of the world media went on repeating the case anddeath Þgures as if they were real. Illinois Public Health Director DrNgozi Ezike revealed the deceit while her bosses must have beenclenching their bu
If you were in a hospice and given a few weeks to live and you were then found to have Covid that would be counted as a Covid death. [There might be] a clear alternate cause, but it is still listed as a Covid death. So everyone listed as a Covid death doesnÕt mean that was the cause of the death, but that they had Covid at the time of death. 
Yes, a ÔCovid virusÕ never shown to exist and tested for with a testnot testing for the ÔvirusÕ. In the Þrst period of the pandemic hoaxthrough the spring of 2020 the process began of designating almosteverything a ÔCovidÕ death and this has continued ever since. I sat ina restaurant one night listening to a loud conversation on the nexttable where a family was discussing in bewilderment how a relativewho had no symptoms of ÔCovidÕ, and had died of a long-termproblem, could have been diagnosed a death by the ÔvirusÕ. I couldunderstand their bewilderment. If they read this book they willknow why this medical fraud has been perpetrated the world over.
Some media truth shock 
The media ignored the evidence of death certiÞcate fraud untileventually one columnist did speak out when she saw it Þrst-hand.Bel Mooney is a long-time national newspaper journalist in Britaincurrently working for the Daily Mail. Her article on February 19th,2021, carried this headline: ÔMy dad Ted passed three Covid testsand died of a chronic illness yet heÕs o.cially one of BritainÕs 120,000victims of the virus and is far from alone ... so how many more arethere?Õ She told how her 99-year-old father was in a care home witha long-standing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and vasculardementia. Maybe, but he was still aware enough to tell her from thestart that there was no ÔvirusÕ and he refused the ÔvaccineÕ for thatreason. His death was not unexpected given his chronic healthproblems and Mooney said she was shocked to Þnd that ÔCovid-19Õwas declared the cause of death on his death certiÞcate. She said thiswas a Ôbizarre and unacceptable untruthÕ for a man with long-timehealth problems who had tested negative twice at the home for theÔvirusÕ. I was also shocked by this story although not by what shesaid. I had been highlighting the death certiÞcate manipulation forten months. It was the conÞrmation that a professional full-timejournalist only realised this was going on when it a.ected herdirectly and neither did she know that whether her dad testedpositive or negative was irrelevant with the test not testing for theÔvirusÕ. Where had she been? She said she did not believe inÔconspiracy theoriesÕ without knowing IÕm sure that this andÔconspiracy theoristsÕ were terms put into widespread circulation bythe CIA in the 1960s to discredit those who did not accept theridiculous o.cial story of the Kennedy assassination. A blanketstatement of ÔI donÕt believe in conspiracy theoriesÕ is always bizarre.The dictionary deÞnition of the term alone means the world isdrowning in conspiracies. What she said was even more daher dad had just been a.ected by the ÔCovidÕ conspiracy. Why elsedoes she think that ÔCovid-19Õ was going on the death certiÞcates ofpeople who died of something else?
To be fair once she saw from personal experience what washappening she didnÕt mince words. Mooney was called by the carehome on the morning of February 9th to be told her father had diedin his sleep. When she asked for the o.cial cause of death whatcame back was ÔCovid-19Õ. Mooney challenged this and was toldthere had been deaths from Covid on the dementia ßoor (conÞrmedby a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ) so they considered it Ôreasonableto assumeÕ. ÔBut doctor,Õ Mooney rightly protested, Ôan assumptionisnÕt a diagnosis.Õ She said she didnÕt blame the perfectly decent andsympathetic doctor Ð Ôhe was just doing his jobÕ. Sorry, but thatÕsbullshit. He wasnÕt doing his job at all. He was pudeath on the death certiÞcate and that is a criminal o.ence for whichhe should be brought to account and the same with the millions ofdoctors worldwide who have done the same. They were not doingtheir job they were following orders and that must not wash at newNuremberg trials any more than it did at the Þrst ones. MooneyÕsdoctor was ÔassumingÕ (presuming) as he was told to, but Ôjustfollowing ordersÕ makes no di.erence to his actions. A doctorÕs job isto serve the patient and the truth, not follow orders, but thatÕs whatthey have done all over the world and played a central part inmaking the ÔCovidÕ hoax possible with all its catastrophicconsequences for humanity. Shame on them and they must answerfor their actions. Mooney said her disquiet worsened when sheregistered her fatherÕs death by telephone and was told by theregistrar there had been very many other cases like hers where ÔthedeceasedÕ had not tested positive for ÔCovidÕ yet it was recorded asthe cause of death. The test may not ma, but those involved attheir level think it maaccurate diagnosis. The pressure to do this is coming from the top ofthe national ÔhealthÕ pyramids which in turn obey the World HealthOrganization which obeys Gates and the Cult. Mooney said theregistrar agreed that this must distort the national Þgures addingthat Ôthe strangest thing is that every winter we record countlessdeaths from ßu, and this winter there have been none. Not one!Õ Sheasked if the registrar thought deaths from ßu were beingmisdiagnosed and lumped together with ÔCovidÕ deaths. The answerwas a Ôpuzzled yesÕ. Mooney said that the funeral director said thesame about ÔCovidÕ deaths which had nothing to do with ÔCovidÕ.They had lost count of the number of families upset by this andother funeral companies in di.erent countries have had the sameexperience. Mooney wrote:
The nightly shroud-waving and shocking close-ups of pain imposed on us by the TV news bewildered and terrified the population into eager compliance with lockdowns. We were invited to Ôsave the NHSÕ and to grieve for strangers Ð the real-life loved ones behind those shocking death counts. Why would the public imagine what I now fear, namely that the way Covid-19 death statistics are compiled might make the numbers seem greater than they are? 
Oh, just a li
Do the maths 
Mooney asked why a country would wish to skew its mortalityÞgures by wrongly certifying deaths? What had been going on?Well, if you donÕt believe in conspiracies you will never Þnd theanswer which is that itÕs a conspiracy. She did, however, describewhat she had discovered as a Ônational scandalÕ. In reality itÕs aglobal scandal and happening everywhere. Pillars of this conspiracywere all put into place before the buas pressed with theDrosten PCR protocol and high ampliÞcations to produce the casesand death certiÞcate changes to secure illusory ÔCovidÕ deaths.Mooney notes that normally two doctors were needed to certify adeath, with one having to know the patient, and how the rules werechanged in the spring of 2020 to allow one doctor to do this. In thesame period ÔCovid deathsÕ were decreed to be all cases whereCovid-19 was put on the death certiÞcate even without a positive testor any symptoms. Mooney asked: ÔHow many of the 30,851 (as ofJanuary 15) care home resident deaths with Covid-19 on thecertiÞcate (32.4 per cent of all deaths so far) were based on anassumption, like that of my father? And what has that done to ournational psyche?ÕAll of them is the answer to the Þrst question and ithas devastated and dismantled the national psyche, actually theglobal psyche, on a colossal scale. In the UK case and death data iscompiled by organisations like Public Health England (PHE) and theO.ce for National Statistics (ONS). Mooney highlights the insanepolicy of counting a death from any cause as ÔCovid-19Õ if thishappens within 28 days of a positive test (with a test not testing forthe ÔvirusÕ) and she points out that ONS statistics reßect deathsÔinvolving CovidÕ Ôor due to CovidÕ which meant in practice anydeath where ÔCovid-19Õ was mentioned on the death certiÞcate. Shedescribed the consequences of this fraud:
Most people will accept the narrative they are fed, so panicky governments here and in Europe witnessed the harsh measures enacted in totalitarian China and jumped into lockdown. Headlines about Covid deaths tolled like the knell that would bring doomsday to us all. Fear stalked our empty streets. Politicians parroted the frankly ridiculous aim of Ôzero CovidÕ and shut down the economy, while most British people agreed that lockdown was essential and (astonishingly to me, as a patriotic Brit) even wanted more restrictions. 
For what? Lies on death certificates? Never mind the grim toll of lives ruined, suicides, schools closed, rising inequality, depression, cancelled hospital treatments, cancer patients in a torture of waiting, poverty, economic devastation, loneliness, families kept apart, and so on. How many lives have been lost as a direct result of lockdown? 
She said that we could join in a national chorus of shock and horrorat reaching the 120,000 death toll which was surely certain to havebeen totally skewed all along, but what about the human cost oflockdown justiÞed by these Ôdeath ÞguresÕ? The British Medical Journal had reported a 1,493 percent increase in cases of childrentaken to Great Ormond Street Hospital with abusive head injuriesalone and then there was the e.ect on families:
Perhaps the most shocking thing about all this is that families have been kept apart Ð and obeyed the most irrational, changing rules at the whim of government Ð because they believed in the statistics. They succumbed to fear, which his generation rejected in that war fought for freedom. Dad (God rest his soul) would be angry. And so am I. 
Another theme to watch is that in the winter months when thereare more deaths from all causes they focus on ÔCovidÕ deaths and inthe summer when the British Lung Foundation says respiratorydisease plummets by 80 percent they rage on about ÔcasesÕ. Eitherway fascism on population is always the answer.
Nazi eugenics in the 21st century 
Elderly people in care homes have been isolated from their familiesmonth aes andgrandchildren who were banned from seeing them. We were toldthat lockdown fascism was to Ôprotect the vulnerableÕ like elderlypeople. At the same time Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders wereplaced on their medical Þles so that if they needed resuscitation itwasnÕt done and ÔCovid-19Õ went on their death certiÞcates. Oldpeople were not being ÔprotectedÕ they were being culled Ðmurdered in truth. DNR orders were being decreed for disabled andyoung people with learning di.culties or psychological problems.The UK Care Quality Commission, a non-departmental body of theDepartment of Health and Social Care, found that 34 percent ofthose working in health and social care were pressured into placingÔdo not apatients who su.ered from disabilities and learning di.cultieswithout involving the patient or their families in the decision. UKjudges ruled that an elderly woman with dementia should have theDNA-manipulating ÔCovid vaccineÕ against her sonÕs wishes and thata man with severe learning di.culties should have the jab despitehis familyÕs objections. Never mind that many had already died. Thejudiciary always supports doctors and government in fascistdictatorships. They wouldnÕt dare do otherwise. A horriÞc video wasposted showing fascist o.cers from Los Angeles police forciblygiving the ÔCovidÕ shot to women with special needs who werescreaming that they didnÕt want it. The same fascists are seen givingthe jab to a sleeping elderly woman in a care home. This is straightout of the Nazi playbook. HitlerÕs Nazis commithe mentally ill and physically disabled throughout Germany andoccupied territories in the programme that became known as AktionT4, or just T4. Sabbatian-controlled Hitler and his grotesque craziesset out to kill those they considered useless and unnecessary. TheReich CommiCongenital Illnesses registered the births of babies identiÞed byphysicians to have ÔdefectsÕ. By 1941 alone more than 5,000 childrenwere murdered by the state and it is estimated that in total thenumber of innocent people killed in Aktion T4 was between 275,000and 300,000. Parents were told their children had been sent away forÔspecial treatmentÕ never to return. It is rather pathetic to see claimsabout plans for new extermination camps being dismissed todaywhen the same force behind current events did precisely that 80years ago. Margaret Sanger was a Cult operative who used ÔbirthcontrolÕ to sanitise her programme of eugenics. Organisations shefounded became what is now Planned Parenthood. Sanger proposedthat Ôthe whole dysgenic population would have its choice ofsegregation or sterilizationÕ. These included epileptics, Ôfeeble.mindedÕ, and prostitutes. Sanger opposed charity because itperpetuated Ôhuman wasteÔ. She reveals the Cult mentality and ifanyone thinks that extermination camps are a Ôconspiracy theoryÕtheir naivety is touching if breathtakingly stupid.
If you donÕt believe that doctors can act with callous disregard fortheir patients it is worth considering that doctors and medical sta.agreed to put government-decreed DNR orders on medical Þles anddo nothing when resuscitation is called for. I donÕt know what youcall such people in your house. In mine they are Nazis from the JosefMengele School of Medicine. Phenomenal numbers of old peoplehave died worldwide from the e.ects of lockdown, depression, lackof treatment, the ÔvaccineÕ (more later) and losing the will to live. Acommon response at the start of the manufactured pandemic was toremove old people from hospital beds and transfer them to nursinghomes. The decision would result in a mass cull of elderly people inthose homes through lack of treatment Ð not ÔCovidÕ. Care homewhistleblowers have told how once the ÔCovidÕ era began doctorswould not come to their homes to treat patients and they werebegging for drugs like antibiotics that oer came. The mostinfamous example was ordered by New York governor AndrewCuomo, brother of a moronic CNN host, who amazingly was givenan Emmy Award for his handling of the ÔCovid crisisÕ by theridiculous Wokers that hand them out. Just how ridiculous could beseen in February, 2021, when a Department of Justice and FBIinvestigation began into how thousands of old people in New Yorkdied in nursing homes away for ÔCovidÕ patients on CuomoÕs say-so Ð and how he and hissta. covered up these facts. This couldnÕt have happened to a nicerpsychopath. Even then there was a ÔCovidÕ spin. Reports said thatthousands of old people who tested positive for ÔCovidÕ in hospitalwere transferred to nursing homes to both die of ÔCovidÕ andtransmit it to others. No Ð they were in hospital because they were illand the fact that they tested positive with a test not testing for theÔvirusÕ is irrelevant. They were ill oubiquitous in old people near the end of their lives. Their transferout of hospital meant that their treatment stopped and many wouldgo on to die.
TheyÕre old. Who gives a damn? 
I have exposed in the books for decades the Cult plan to cull theworldÕs old people and even to introduce at some point what theycall a Ôdemise pillÕ which at a certain age everyone would take andbe out of here by law. In March, 2021, Spain legalised euthanasia andassisted suicide following the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourgand Canada on the Tiptoe to the demise pill. Treatment of old peopleby many ÔcareÕ homes has been a disgrace in the ÔCovidÕ era. Thereare many, many, caring sta. Ð I know some. There have, however,been legions of stories about callous treatment of old people andtheir families. Police were called when families came to take theirloved ones home in the light of isolation that was killing them. Theybecame prisoners of the state. Care home residents in insane, fascistOntario, Canada, were not allowed to leave their room once theÔCovidÕ hoax began. UK sta. have even wheeled elderly peopleaway from windows where family members were talking with them.Oriana Criscuolo from Stockport in the English North West droppedo. some things for her 80-year-old father who has ParkinsonÕsdisease and dementia and she wanted to wave to him through aground-ßoor window. She was told that was ÔillegalÕ. When she wentanyway they closed the curtains in the middle of the day. Orianasaid:
ItÕs just unbelievable. I cannot understand how care home staff Ð people who are being paid to care Ð have become so uncaring. Their behaviour is inhumane and cruel. ItÕs beyond belief. 
She was right and this was not a one-o.. What a way to end your lifein such loveless circumstances. UK registered nurse Nicky Millen, aproper old school nurse for 40 years, said that when she started hercareer care was based on dignity, choice, compassion and empathy.Now she said Ôthe things that are important to me have gone out ofthe window.Õ She was appalled that people were dying without theirloved ones and saying goodbye on iPads. Nicky described how adistressed 89-year-old lady stroked her face and asked her Ôhowmany paracetamol would it take to Þnish me o.Õ. Life was no longerworth living while not seeing her family. Nicky said she washumiliated in front of the ward sta. and patients for lestroke her face and giving her a cuddle. Such is the dehumanisationthat the ÔCovidÕ hoax has brought to the surface. Nicky worked incare homes where patients told her they were being held prisoner. ÔIwant to live until I dieÕ, one said to her. ÔI had a lady in tears becauseshe hadnÕt seen her great-grandson.Õ Nicky was compassionate oldschool meeting psychopathic New Normal. She also said she hadworked on a ÔCovidÕ ward with no ÔCovidÕ patients. Jewish writerShai Held wrote an article in March, 2020, which was headlined ÔTheStaggering, Heartless Cruelty Toward the ElderlyÕ. What hedescribed was happening from the earliest days of lockdown. Hesaid Ôthe elderlyÕ were considered a group and not uniqueindividuals (the way of the Woke). Shai Held said:
Notice how the all-too-familiar rhetoric of dehumanization works: ÔThe elderlyÕ are bunched together as a faceless mass, all of them considered culprits and thus effectively deserving of the suffering the pandemic will inflict upon them. Lost entirely is the fact that the elderly are individual human beings, each with a distinctive face and voice, each with hopes and dreams, memories and regrets, friendships and marriages, loves lost and loves sustained. 
ÔThe elderlyÕ have become another dehumanised group for whichanything goes and for many that has resulted in cold disregard fortheir rights and their life. The distinctive face that Held talks about isdesigned to be deleted by masks until everyone is part of a facelessmass.
ÔWar-zoneÕ hospitals myth 
Again and again medical professionals have told me what was reallygoing on and how hospitals Ôoverrun like war zonesÕ according tothe media were virtually empty. The mantra from medicalwhistleblowers was please donÕt use my name or my career is over.Citizen journalists around the world sneaked into hospitals to Þlmevidence exposing the Ôwar-zoneÕ lie. They really were largely emptywith closed wards and operating theatres. I met a hospital worker inmy town on the Isle of Wight during the Þrst lockdown in 2020 whosaid the only island hospital had never been so quiet. Lockdown wasjustiÞed by the psychopaths to stop hospitals being overrun. At thesame time that the island hospital was near-empty the militaryarrived here to provide extra beds. It was all propaganda to ramp upthe fear to ensure compliance with fascism as were never-usedtemporary hospitals with thousands of beds known as Nightingalesand never-used make-shigovernment. A man who helped to install those extra island bedsaere never used and the hospitalwas empty. Doctors and nurses Ôstood around talking or on theirphones, wandering down to us to see what we were doingÕ. Therewere no masks or social distancing. He accused the useless localisland paper, the County Press, of Ôpumping the fear as if our hospitalwas overrun and we only have one so it should have beenÕ. Hedescribed ambulances parked up with crews outside in deck chairs.When his brother called an ambulance he was told there was a two-hour backlog which he called ÔbullshitÕ. An old lady on the island fellÔand was in a bad wayÕ, but a caller who rang for an ambulance wastold the situation wasnÕt urgent enough. Ambulance stations wereworking under capacity while people would hear ambulances withsirens blaring driving through the streets. When those living nearthe stations realised what was going on they would follow them asthey lethen came back without stopping. All this was to increase levels offear and the same goes for the Ôventilator shortage crisisÕ that costtens of millions for hastily produced ventilators never to be used.
Ambulance crews that agreed to be exploited in this way for fearpropaganda might Þnd themselves a mirror. I wish them well withthat. Empty hospitals were the obvious consequence of treatmentand diagnoses of non-ÕCovidÕ conditions cancelled and thoseinvolved handed a death sentence. People have been dying at homefrom undiagnosed and untreated cancer, heart disease and other life-threatening conditions to allow empty hospitals to deal with aÔpandemicÕ that wasnÕt happening.
Death of the innocent 
ÔWar-zonesÕ have been laying o. nursing sta., even doctors wherethey can. There was no work for them. Lockdown was justiÞed bysaving lives and protecting the vulnerable they were actually killingwith DNR orders and preventing empty hospitals being ÔoverrunÕ. InBritain the mantra of stay at home to Ôsave the NHSÕ was everywhereand across the world the same story was being sold when it was alllies. Two California doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi atAccelerated Urgent Care in BakersÞeld, held a news conference inApril, 2020, to say that intensive care units in California were Ôempty,essentiallyÕ, with hospitals shulaying o. doctors. The California health system was working atminimum capacity Ôgee just donÕt havethe volumeÕ. They said that people with conditions such as heartdisease and cancer were not coming to hospital out of fear of ÔCovid.19Õ. Their video was deleted by Susan WojcickiÕs Cult-ownedYouTube ae million views. Florida governor RonDesantis, who rejected the severe lockdowns of other states and isbeing targeted for doing so, said that in March, 2020, every USgovernor was given models claiming they would run out of hospitalbeds in days. That was never going to happen and the ÔmodellersÕknew it. Deceit can be found at every level of the system. UrgentchildrenÕs operations were cancelled including fracture repairs andbiopsies to spot cancer. Eric Nicholls, a consultant paediatrician, saidÔthis is obviously concerning and we need to return to normaloperating and to increase capacity as soon as possibleÕ. Psychopathsin power were rather less concerned because they are psychopaths.Deletion of urgent care and diagnosis has been happening all overthe world and how many kids and others have died as a result of theactions of these cold and heartless lunatics dictating ÔhealthÕ policy?The number must be stratospheric. Richard Sullivan, professor ofcancer and global health at KingÕs College London, said peoplefeared ÔCovidÕ more than cancer such was the campaign of fear.ÔYears of lost life will be quite dramaticÕ, Sullivan said, with Ôa hugeamount of avoidable mortalityÕ. Sarah Woolnough, executivedirector for policy at Cancer Research UK, said there had been a 75percent drop in urgent referrals to hospitals by family doctors ofpeople with suspected cancer. Sullivan said that Ôa lot of serviceshave had to scale back Ð weÕve seen a dramatic decrease in theamount of elective cancer surgeryÕ. Lockdown deaths worldwide hasbeen absolutely fantastic with the New York Post reporting how dataconÞrmed that Ôlockdowns end more lives than they saveÕ:
There was a sharp decline in visits to emergency rooms and an increase in fatal heart attacks because patients didnÕt receive prompt treatment. Many fewer people were screened for cancer. Social isolation contributed to excess deaths from dementia and AlzheimerÕs. 
Researchers predicted that the social and economic upheaval would lead to tens of thousands of Òdeaths of despairÓ from drug overdoses, alcoholism and suicide. As unemployment surged and mental-health and substance-abuse treatment programs were interrupted, the reported levels of anxiety, depression and suicidal thoughts increased dramatically, as did alcohol sales and fatal drug overdoses. 
This has been happening while nurses and other sta. had so muchtime on their hands in the Ôwar-zonesÕ that Tic-Tok dancing videosbegan appearing across the Internet with medical sta. dancingaround in empty wards and corridors as people died at home fromcauses that would normally have been treated in hospital.
Mentions in dispatches 
One brave and truth-commier was LouiseHampton, a call handler with the UK NHS who made a viralInternet video saying she had done Ôfuck allÕ during the ÔpandemicÕwhich was Ôa load of bollocksÕ. She said that ÔCovid-19Õ wasrebranded ßu and of course she lost her job. This is what happens inthe medical and endless other professions now when you tell thetruth. Louise Þlmed inside Ôwar-zoneÕ accident and emergencydepartments to show they were empty and I mean empty as in noone there. The mainstream media could have done the same andblown the ga. on the whole conspiracy. They havenÕt to their eternalshame. Not that most ÔjournalistsÕ seem capable of manifestingshame as with the psychopaths they slavishly repeat withoutquestion. The relative few who were admiproblems were leed ones allowed to seethem because of ÔCovidÕ rules and they included kids dying withoutthe comfort of mum and dad at their bedside while the evil behindthis couldnÕt give a damn. It was all good fun to them. A ScoNHS sta. nurse publicly quit in the spring of 2021 saying: ÔI can nolonger be part of the lies and the corruption by the government.Õ Shesaid hospitals ÔarenÕt full, the beds arenÕt full, beds have been shut,wards have been shutÕ. Hospitals were never busy throughoutÔCovidÕ. The sta. nurse said that Nicola Sturgeon, tragically theleader of the Scoernment, was on television saying save thehospitals and the NHS Ð Ôbut the beds are emptyÕ and ÔweÕve notseen ßu, we always see ßu every yearÕ. She wrote to government andspoke with her union Unison (the unions are Cult-compromised anduseless, but nothing changed. Many of her colleagues were scared oflosing their jobs if they spoke out as they wanted to. She saidnursing sta. were being a.ected by wearing masks all day and Ômyhead is spliery shiearing a maskÕ. The NHS is partof the fascist tyranny and must be dismantled so we can start againwith human beings in charge. (Ironically, hospitals were reported tobe busier again when o.cial ÔCovidÕ cases fell in spring/summer of2021 and many other conditions required treatment at the same timeas the fake vaccine rollout.)
I will cover the ÔCovid vaccineÕ scam in detail later, but it isanother indicator of the sickening disregard for human life that I amhighlighting here. The DNA-manipulating concoctions do not fulÞlthe deÞnition of a ÔvaccineÕ, have never been used on humans beforeand were given only emergency approval because trials were notcompleted and they continued using the unknowing public. Theresult was what a NHS senior nurse with responsibility for ÔvaccineÕprocedure said was ÔgenocideÕ. She said the ÔvaccinesÕ were notÔvaccinesÕ. They had not been shown to be safe and claims abouttheir e.ectiveness by drug companies were Ôpoetic licenceÕ. Shedescribed what was happening as a Ôhorrid act of humanannihilationÕ. The nurse said that management had instigated apolicy of not providing a Patient Information Leaßet (PIL) beforepeople were ÔvaccinatedÕ even though health care professionals aresupposed to do this according to protocol. Patients should also betold that they are taking part in an ongoing clinical trial. Herchallenges to what is happening had seen her excluded frommeetings and ridiculed in others. She said she was told to Ôwatch mystep É or I would Þnd myself surplus to requirementsÕ. The nurse,who spoke anonymously in fear of her career, said she asked herNHS manager why he/she was content with taking part in genocideagainst those having the ÔvaccinesÕ. The reply was that everyone hadto play their part and to Ôput up, shut up, and get it doneÕ.Government was Ôleaning heavilyÕ on NHS management which wasclearly leaning heavily on sta.. This is how the global ÔmedicalÕhierarchy operates and it starts with the Cult and its World HealthOrganization.
She told the story of a doctor who had the PÞzer jab and whenquestioned had no idea what was in it. The doctor had never readthe literature. We have to stop treating doctors as intellectual giantswhen so many are moral and medical pygmies. The doctor did noteven know that the ÔvaccinesÕ were not fully approved or that theirtrials were ongoing. They were, however, asking their patients ifthey minded taking part in follow-ups for research purposes Ð yes,the ongoing clinical trial. The nurse said the doctorÕs ignorance wasnot rare and she had spoken to a hospital consultant who had the jabwithout any idea of the background or that the ÔtrialsÕ had not beencompleted. Nurses and pharmacists had shown the same ignorance.
ÔMy NHS colleagues have forsaken their duty of care, broken theircode of conduct Ð Hippocratic Oath Ð and have been brainwashedjust the same as the majority of the UK public through propagandaÉÕ She said she had not been able to recruit a single NHS colleague,doctor, nurse or pharmacist to stand with her and speak out. Herunion had refused to help. She said that if the genocide came to lightshe would not hesitate to give evidence at a Nuremberg-type trialagainst those in power who could have a.ected the outcomes butdidnÕt.
And all for what? 
To put the nonsense into perspective letÕs say the ÔvirusÕ does existand letÕs go completely crazy and accept that the o.cialmanipulated Þgures for cases and deaths are accurate. Even then astudy by Stanford University epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidispublished on the World Health Organization website produced anaverage infection to fatality rate of É 0.23 percent! Ioannidis said: ÔIfone could sample equally from all locations globally, the medianinfection fatality rate might even be substantially lower than the0.23% observed in my analysis.Õ For healthy people under 70 it wasÉ 0.05 percent! This compares with the 3.4 percent claimed by theCult-owned World Health Organization when the hoax was Þrstplayed and maximum fear needed to be generated. An updatedStanford study in April, 2021, put the ÔinfectionÕ to ÔfatalityÕ rate atjust 0.15 percent. Another team of scientists led by Megan OÕDriscolland Henrik Salje studied data from 45 countries and published theirÞndings on the Nature website. For children and young people theÞgure is so small it virtually does not register although authoritieswill be hyping dangers to the young when they introduce DNA-manipulating ÔvaccinesÕ for children. The OÕDriscoll study producedan average infection-fatality Þgure of 0.003 for children from birth tofour; 0.001 for 5 to 14; 0.003 for 15 to 19; and it was still only 0.456 upto 64. To claim that children must be ÔvaccinatedÕ to protect themfrom ÔCovidÕ is an obvious lie and so there must be another reasonand there is. WhatÕs more the average age of a ÔCovidÕ death is akinto the average age that people die in general. The average age ofdeath in England is about 80 for men and 83 for women. The averageage of death from alleged ÔCovidÕ is between 82 and 83. Californiadoctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi, said at their April mediaconference that projection models of millions of deaths had beenÔwoefully inaccurateÕ. They produced detailed Þgures showing thatCalifornians had a 0.03 chance of dying from ÔCovidÕ based on thenumber of people who tested positive (with a test not testing for theÔvirusÕ). Erickson said there was a 0.1 percent chance of dying fromÔCovidÕ in the state of New York, not just the city, and a 0.05 percentchance in Spain, a centre of ÔCovid-19Õ hysteria at one stage. TheStanford studies supported the doctorsÕ data with fatality rateestimates of 0.23 and 0.15 percent. How close are these Þgures to myestimate of zero? Death-rate Þgures claimed by the World HealthOrganization at the start of the hoax were some 15 times higher. TheCalifornia doctors said there was no justiÞcation for lockdowns andthe economic devastation they caused. Everything they had everlearned about quarantine was that you quarantine the sick and notthe healthy. They had never seen this before and it made no medicalsense.
Why in the in the light of all this would governments and medicalsystems the world over say that billions must go under house arrest;lose their livelihood; in many cases lose their mind, their health andtheir life; force people to wear masks dangerous to health andpsychology; make human interaction and even family interaction acriminal o.ence; ban travel; close restaurants, bars, watching livesport, concerts, theatre, and any activity involving humantogetherness and discourse; and closing schools to isolate childrenfrom their friends and cause many to commit suicide in acts ofhopelessness and despair? The California doctors said lockdownconsequences included increased child abuse, partner abuse,alcoholism, depression, and other impacts they were seeing everyday. Who would do that to the entire human race if not mentally-illpsychopaths of almost unimaginable extremes like Bill Gates? Wemust face the reality of what we are dealing with and come out ofdenial. Fascism and tyranny are made possible only by the targetpopulation submi. Thewhole of human history shows that to be true. Most people naivelyand unquestioning believed what they were told about a ÔdeadlyvirusÕ and meekly and weakly submididnÕt believe it Ð at least in total Ð still submiconsequences of not doing so. For the rest who wouldnÕt submitdraconian Þnes have been imposed, brutal policing by psychopathsfor psychopaths, and condemnation from the meek and weak whocondemn the Pushbackers on behalf of the very force that has them,too, in its gunsights. ÔPatheticÕ does not even begin to su.ce.BritainÕs brainless ÔHealthÕ Secretary Maarned anyonelying to border o.cials about returning from a list of ÔhotspotÕcountries could face a jail sentence of up to ten years which is morethan for racially-aggravated assault, incest and aesex with a child under 13. Hancock is a lunatic, but he has the stateapparatus behind him in a Cult-led chain reaction and the same withUK ÔVaccine MinisterÕ Nadhim Zahawi, a prominent member of themega-Cult secret society, Le Cercle, which featured in my earlierbooks. The Cult enforces its will on governments and medicalsystems; government and medical systems enforce their will onbusiness and police; business enforces its will on sta. who enforce iton customers; police enforce the will of the Cult on the populationand play their essential part in creating a world of fascist control thattheir own children and grandchildren will have to live in their entirelives. It is a hierarchical pyramid of imposition and acquiescenceand, yes indeedy, of clinical insanity.
Does anyone bright enough to read this book have to ask what theanswer is? I think not, but I will reveal it anyway in the fewest ofsyllables: Tell the psychos and their moronic lackeys to fuck o. andletÕs get on with our lives. We are many Ð They are few.
CHAPTER SEVEN 
War on your mind 
One believes things because one has been conditioned to believe them Aldous Huxley, Brave New World 
Ihave described the ÔCovidÕ hoax as a ÔPsyopÕ and that is true inevery sense and on every level in accordance with the deÞnition ofthat term which is psychological warfare. Break down the ÔCovidpandemicÕ to the foundation themes and it is psychological warfareon the human individual and collective mind.
The same can be said for the entire human belief system involvingevery subject you can imagine. Huxley was right in his contentionthat people believe what they are conditioned to believe and thiscomes from the repetition throughout their lives of the samefalsehoods. They spew from government, corporations, media andendless streams of ÔexpertsÕ telling you what the Cult wants you tobelieve and oen believing it themselves (although far from always).ÔExpertsÕ are rewarded with ÔprestigiousÕ jobs and titles and asagents of perceptual programming with regular access to the media.The Cult has to control the narrative Ð control information Ð or theylose control of the vital, crucial, without-which-they-cannot-prevailpublic perception of reality. The foundation of that control today isthe Internet made possible by the Defense Advanced ResearchProjects Agency (DARPA), the incredibly sinister technological armof the Pentagon. The Internet is the result of military technology.
DARPA openly brags about establishing the Internet which has beena long-term project to lasso the minds of the global population. Ihave said for decades the plan is to control information to such anextreme that eventually no one would see or hear anything that theCult does not approve. We are closing in on that end with ferociouscensorship since the ÔCovidÕ hoax began and in my case it startedback in the 1990s in terms of books and speaking venues. I had tocreate my own publishing company in 1995 precisely because no oneelse would publish my books even then. I think theyÕre all stillrunning.
Cult Internet 
To secure total control of information they needed the Internet inwhich pre-programmed algorithms can seek out ÔuncleanÕ contentfor deletion and even stop it being posted in the Þrst place. The Culthad to dismantle print and non-Internet broadcast media to ensurethe transfer of information to the appropriate-named ÔWebÕ Ð acritical expression of the Cult web. WeÕve seen the ever-quickeningdemise of traditional media and control of what is le by a tinynumber of corporations operating worldwide. Independentjournalism in the mainstream is already dead and never was thatmore obvious than since the turn of 2020. The Cult wants allinformation communicated via the Internet to globally censor andallow the plug to be pulled any time. Lockdowns and forcedisolation has meant that communication between people has beenthrough electronic means and no longer through face-to-facediscourse and discussion. Cult psychopaths have targeted the bars,restaurants, sport, venues and meeting places in general for thisreason. None of this is by chance and itÕs to stop people gathering inany kind of privacy or number while being able to track and monitorall Internet communications and block them as necessary. Evenprivate messages between individuals have been censored by thesefascists that control Cult fronts like Facebook, Twi, Google andYouTube which are all o.cially run by Sabbatian place-people andfrom the background by higher-level Sabbatian place people.
Facebook, Google, Amazon and their like were seed-funded andsupported into existence with money-no-object infusions of fundseither directly or indirectly from DARPA and CIA technology armIn-Q-Tel. The Cult plays the long game and prepares very carefullyfor big plays like ÔCovidÕ. Amazon is another front in thepsychological war and prebook sales and increasingly publishing. AmazonÕs limitless fundshave deleted fantastic numbers of independent publishers to seizeglobal domination on the way to deciding which books can be soldand circulated and which cannot. Moves in that direction are alreadyhappening. AmazonÕs leading light Je. Bezos is the grandson ofLawrence Preston Gise who worked with DARPA predecessorARPA. Amazon has big connections to the CIA and the Pentagon.The plan I have long described went like this:
1.
 Employ military technology to establish the Internet.

2.
 Sell the Internet as a place where people can freely communicate without censorship andallow that to happen until the Net becomes the central and irreversible pillar of humansociety. If the Internet had been highly censored from the start many would have rejected it.

3.
 Fund and manipulate major corporations into being to control the circulation ofinformation on your Internet using cover stories about geeks in garages to explain how theycame about. Give them unlimited funds to expand rapidly with no need to make a proÞt foryears while non-Cult companies who need to balance the books cannot compete. You knowthat in these circumstances your Googles, YouTubes, Facebooks and Amazons are going tosecure near monopolies by either crushing or buying up the opposition.

4.
 Allow freedom of expression on both the Internet and communication platforms to drawpeople in until the Internet is the central and irreversible pillar of human society and yourcommunication corporations have reached a stage of near monopoly domination.

5.
 Then unleash your always-planned frenzy of censorship on the basis of Ôwhere else areyou going to go?Õ and continue to expand that until nothing remains that the Cult does notwant its human targets to see.


The process was timed to hit the ÔCovidÕ hoax to ensure the bestchance possible of controlling the narrative which they knew theyhad to do at all costs. They were, aer all, about to unleash a ÔdeadlyvirusÕ that didnÕt really exist. If you do that in an environment offree-ßowing information and opinion you would be dead in thewater before you could say Gates is a psychopath. The network wasin place through which the Cult-created-and-owned World HealthOrganization could dictate the ÔCovidÕ narrative and response policyslavishly supported by Cult-owned Internet communication giantsand mainstream media while those telling a di.erent story werecensored. Google, YouTube, Facebook and Twiannounced that they would do this. What else would we expect fromCult-owned operations like Facebook which former executives haveconÞrmed set out to make the platform more addictive thancigaredivision between people and groups and scramble the minds of theyoung? If Zuckerberg lives out the rest of his life without going tojail for crimes against humanity, and most emphatically against theyoung, it will be a travesty of justice. Still, no ma, cause and e.ectwill catch up with him eventually and the same with Sergey Brinand Larry Page at Google with its CEO Sundar Pichai who Þx theGoogle search results to promote Cult narratives and hide theopposition. Put the same key words into Google and other searchengines like DuckDuckGo and you will see how di.erent results canbe. Wikipedia is another intensely biased ÔencyclopaediaÕ whichskews its content to the Cult agenda. YouTube links to WikipediaÕsversion of ÔCovidÕ and Ôclimate changeÕ on video pages in whichexperts in their Þeld o.er a di.erent opinion (even that isincreasingly rare with Wojcicki censorship). Into this ÔCovidÕ silence-them network must be added government media censors, sorryÔregulatorsÕ, such as Ofcom in the UK which imposed tyrannicalrestrictions on British broadcasters that had the e.ect of banning mefrom ever appearing. Just to debate with me about my evidence andviews on ÔCovidÕ would mean breaking the fascistic impositions ofOfcom and its CEO career government bureaucrat Melanie Dawes.Gutless British broadcasters tremble at the very thought of fascistOfcom.
Psychos behind ÔCovidÕ 
The reason for the ÔCovidÕ catastrophe in all its facets and forms canbe seen by whom and what is driving the policies worldwide in sucha coordinated way. Decisions are not being made to protect health,but to target psychology. The dominant group guiding andÔadvisingÕ government policy are not medical professionals. They arepsychologists and behavioural scientists. Every major country has itsown version of this phenomenon and IÕll use the British example toshow how it works. In many ways the British version has beena.ecting the wider world in the form of the huge behaviourmanipulation network in the UK which operates in other countries.The network involves private companies, government, intelligenceand military. The Cabinet O.ce is at the centre of the governmentÔCovidÕ Psyop and part-owns, with Ôinnovation charityÕ Nesta, theBehavioural Insights Team (BIT) which claims to be independent ofgovernment but patently isnÕt. The BIT was established in 2010 andits job is to manipulate the psyche of the population to acquiesce togovernment demands and so much more. It is also known as theÔNudge UnitÕ, a name inspired by the 2009 book by two ultra-Zionists, Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler, called Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. The book, as with theBehavioural Insights Team, seeks to ÔnudgeÕ behaviour (manipulateit) to make the public follow pasuit those in authority (the Cult). Sunstein is so skilled at this that headvises the World Health Organization and the UK BehaviouralInsights Team and was Administrator of the White House O.ce ofInformation and Regulatory A.airs in the Obama administration.Biden appointed him to the Department of Homeland Security Ðanother ultra-Zionist in the fold to oversee new immigration lawswhich is another policy the Cult wants to control. Sunstein isdesperate to silence anyone exposing conspiracies and co-authored a2008 report on the subject in which suggestions were o.ered to banÔconspiracy theorizingÕ or impose Ôsome kind of tax, Þnancial orotherwise, on those who disseminate such theoriesÕ. I guess apsychiatristÕs chair is out of the question?
SunsteinÕs mate Richard Thaler, an Ôacademic a.liateÕ of the UKBehavioural Insights Team, is a proponent of ÔbehaviouraleconomicsÕ which is deÞned as the study of Ôthe e.ects ofpsychological, cognitive, emotional, cultural and social factors on thedecisions of individuals and institutionsÕ. Study the e.ects so theycan be manipulated to be what you want them to be. Other leadingnames in the development of behavioural economics are ultra-Zionists Daniel Kahneman and Robert J. Shiller and they, withThaler, won the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for theirwork in this Þeld. The Behavioural Insights Team is operating at theheart of the UK government and has expanded globally throughpartnerships with several universities including Harvard, Oxford,Cambridge, University College London (UCL) and Pennsylvania.They claim to have ÔtrainedÕ (reframed) 20,000 civil servants and runmore than 750 projects involving 400 randomised controlled trials indozens of countriesÕ as another version of mind reframers CommonPurpose. BIT works from its o.ce in New York with cities and theiragencies, as well as other partners, across the United States andCanada Ð this is a company part-owned by the British governmentCabinet O.ce. An executive order by President Cult-servant Obamaestablished a US Social and Behavioral Sciences Team in 2015. Theyall have the same reason for being and thatÕs to brainwash thepopulation directly and by brainwashing those in positions ofauthority.
ÔCovidÕ mind game 
Another prime aspect of the UK mind-control network is theÔindependentÕ [joke] ScientiÞc Pandemic Insights Group onBehaviours (SPI-B) which Ôprovides behavioural science adviceaimed at anticipating and helping people adhere to interventionsthat are recommended by medical or epidemiological expertsÕ. Thatmeans manipulating public perception and behaviour to dowhatever government tells them to do. ItÕs disgusting and if theyreally want the public to be ÔsafeÕ this lot should all be under lockand key. According to the government website SPI-B consists ofÔbehavioural scientists, health and social psychologists,anthropologists and historiansÕ and advises the WhiVallance-ledScientiÞc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) which in turnadvises the government on Ôthe scienceÕ (it doesnÕt) and ÔCovidÕpolicy. When politicians say they are being guided by Ôthe scienceÕthis is the rabble in each country they are talking about and thatÔscienceÕ is dominated by behaviour manipulators to enforcegovernment fascism through public compliance. The BehaviourInsight Team is headed by psychologist David Solomon Halpern, avisiting professor at KingÕs College London, and connects with anational and global web of other civilian and military organisationsas the Cult moves towards its goal of fusing them into one fascisticwhole in every country through its ÔFusion DoctrineÕ. The behaviourmanipulation network involves, but is not conÞned to, the ForeignO.ce; National Security Council; government communicationsheadquarters (GCHQ); MI5; MI6; the Cabinet O.ce-based MediaMonitoring Unit; and the Rapid Response Unit which Ômonitorsdigital trends to spot emerging issues; including misinformation anddisinformation; and identiÞes the best way to respondÕ.
There is also the 77th Brigade of the UK military which operateslike the notorious Israeli militaryÕs Unit 8200 in manipulatinginformation and discussion on the Internet by posing as members ofthe public to promote the narrative and discredit those whochallenge it. Here we have the military seeking to manipulatedomestic public opinion while the Nazis in government are Þne withthat. Conservative Member of Parliament Tobias Ellwood, anadvocate of lockdown and control through Ôvaccine passportsÕ, is aLieutenant Colonel reservist in the 77th Brigade which connects withthe military operation jHub, the Ôinnovation centreÕ for the Ministryof Defence and Strategic Command. jHub has also been involvedwith the civilian National Health Service (NHS) in ÔsymptomtracingÕ the population. The NHS is a key part of this mind controlnetwork and produced a document in December, 2020, explaining tosta. how to use psychological manipulation with di.erent groupsand ages to get them to have the DNA-manipulating ÔCovid vaccineÕthatÕs designed to cumulatively rewrite human genetics. Thedocument, called ÔOptimising Vaccination Roll Out Ð DoÕs and DontÕsfor all messaging, documents and ÒcommunicationsÓ in the widestsenseÕ, was published by NHS England and the NHS ImprovementBehaviour Change Unit in partnership with Public Health Englandand Warwick Business School. I hear the mantra about Ôsave theNHSÕ and Ôprotect the NHSÕ when we need to scrap the NHS andstart again. The current version is far too corrupt, far too anti-humanand totally compromised by Cult operatives and their assets. UKgovernment broadcast media censor Ofcom will connect into thisweb Ð as will the BBC with its tremendous Ofcom inßuence Ð tocontrol what the public see and hear and dictate mass perception.Nuremberg trials must include personnel from all theseorganisations.
The fear factor 
The ÔCovidÕ hoax has led to the creation of the UK Cabinet O.ce-connected Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC) which is o.cially describedas providing Ôexpert advice on pandemicsÕ using its independent [allCult operations are ÔindependentÕ] analytical function to providereal-time analysis about infection outbreaks to identify and respondto outbreaks of Covid-19Õ. Another role is to advise the governmenton a response to spikes in infections Ð Ôfor example by closingschools or workplaces in local areas where infection levels haverisenÕ. Put another way, promoting the Cult agenda. The JointBiosecurity Centre is modelled on the Joint Terrorism AnalysisCentre which analyses intelligence to set Ôterrorism threat levelsÕ andhere again you see the fusion of civilian and military operations andintelligence that has led to military intelligence producingdocuments about Ôvaccine hesitancyÕ and how it can be combated.Domestic civilian mathe military. The Joint Biosecurity Centre is headed by Tom Hurd,director general of the O.ce for Security and Counter-Terrorismfrom the establishment-to-its-Þngertips Hurd family. His father isformer Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd. How coincidental that TomHurd went to the elite Eton College and Oxford University withBoris Johnson. Imperial College with its ridiculous computermodeller Neil Ferguson will connect with this gigantic web that willitself interconnect with similar set-ups in other major and not somajor countries. Compared with this Cult network the politicians, bethey Boris Johnson, Donald Trump or Joe Biden, are bit-part playersÔfollowing the scienceÕ. The network of psychologists was on theÔCovidÕ case from the start with the aim of generating maximum fearof the ÔvirusÕ to ensure compliance by the population. A governmentbehavioural science group known as SPI-B produced a paper inMarch, 2020, for discussion by the main government scienceadvisory group known as SAGE. It was headed ÔOptions forincreasing adherence to social distancing measuresÕ and it said thefollowing in a section headed ÔPersuasionÕ:
¥
A substantial number of people still do not feel su.cientlypersonally threatened; it could be that they are reassured by thelow death rate in their demographic group, although levels ofconcern may be rising. Having a good understanding of the riskhas been found to be positively associated with adoption ofCOVID-19 social distancing measures in Hong Kong.

¥
The perceived level of personal threat needs to be increasedamong those who are complacent, using hard-hialuationof options for increasing social distancing emotional messaging.To be e.ective this must also empower people by making clearthe actions they can take to reduce the threat.

¥
Responsibility to others: There seems to be insu.cientunderstanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, peopleÕs rolein transmineed to be framed positively in terms of protecting oneself andthe community, and increase conÞdence that they will be e.ective.

¥
Some people will be more persuaded by appeals to play by therules, some by duty to the community, and some to personal risk.


All these di.erent approaches are needed. The messaging also
needs to take account of the realities of di.erent peopleÕs lives.
Messaging needs to take account of the di.erent motivational
levers and circumstances of di.erent people.
All this could be achieved the SPI-B psychologists said by using the media to increase the sense of personal threat which translates as terrifythe shit out of the population, including children, so they all do whatwe want. ThatÕs not happened has it? Those excuses for ÔjournalistsÕwho wouldnÕt know journalism if it bit them on the arse (the greatmajority) have played their crucial part in serving this Cult-government Psyop to enslave their own kids and grandkids. Howthey live with themselves I have no idea. The psychological war hasbeen underpinned by constant government ÔCovidÕ propaganda inalmost every television and radio ad break, plus the Internet andprint media, which has pounded out the fear with taxpayers footingthe bill for their own programming. The result has been peopleterriÞed of a ÔvirusÕ that doesnÕt exist or one with a tiny fatality rateeven if you believe it does. People walk down the street and aroundthe shops wearing face-nappies damaging their health andpsychology while others report those who refuse to be that na•ve tothe police who turn up in their own face-nappies. I had a cameramancome to my ßat and he was so frightened of ÔCovidÕ he came inwearing a mask and refused to shake my hand in case he caughtsomething. He had Ð na•veitis Ð and the thought that he worked inthe mainstream media was both depressing and made his behaviourperfectly explainable. The fear which has gripped the minds of somany and frozen them into compliance has been carefully cultivatedby these psychologists who are really psychopaths. If lives getdestroyed and a lot of young people commit suicide it shows ourplan is working. SPI-B then turned to compulsion on the public tocomply. ÔWith adequate preparation, rapid change can be achievedÕ,it said. Some countries had introduced mandatory self-isolation on awide scale without evidence of major public unrest and a largemajority of the UKÕs population appeared to be supportive of morecoercive measures with 64 percent of adults saying they wouldsupport puatch the ÔpollsÕ whichare designed to make people believe that public opinion is in favouror against whatever the subject in hand).
For Ôaggressive protective measuresÕ to be e.ective, the SPI-Bpaper said, special aoted to those populationgroups that are more at risk. Translated from the Orwellian thismeans making the rest of population feel guilty for not protectingthe ÔvulnerableÕ such as old people which the Cult and its agencieswere about to kill on an industrial scale with lockdown, lack oftreatment and the Gates ÔvaccineÕ. Psychopath psychologists soldtheir guilt-trip so comprehensively that Los Angeles CountySupervisor Hilda Solis reported that children were apologising (froma distance) to their parents and grandparents for bringing ÔCovidÕinto their homes and gesome of the last words that loved ones will ever hear as they diealone,Õ she said. Gut-wrenchingly Solis then used this childhoodtragedy to tell children to stay at home and Ôkeep your loved onesaliveÕ. Imagine heaping such potentially life-long guilt on a kid whenit has absolutely nothing to do with them. These people are deeplydisturbed and the psychologists behind this even more so.
Uncivil war Ð divide and rule 
Professional mind-controllers at SPI-B wanted the media to increasea sense of responsibility to others (do as youÕre told) and promoteÔpositive messagingÕ for those actions while in contrast to invokeÔsocial disapprovalÕ by the unquestioning, obedient, community ofanyone with a mind of their own. Again the compliant Goebbels-likemedia obliged. This is an old, old, trick employed by tyrannies theworld over throughout human history. You get the target populationto keep the target population in line Ð your line. SPI-B said this couldÔplay an important role in preventing anti-social behaviour ordiscouraging failure to enact pro-social behaviourÕ. For Ôanti-socialÕin the Orwellian parlance of SPI-B see any behaviour thatgovernment doesnÕt approve. SPI-B recommendations said thatÔsocial disapprovalÕ should be accompanied by clear messaging andpromotion of strong collective identity Ð hence the government andcelebrity mantra of ÔweÕre all in this togetherÕ. Sure we are. The minddoctors have such contempt for their targets that they think someclueless comedian, actor or singer telling them to do what thegovernment wants will be enough to win them over. We have hadUK comedian Lenny Henry, actor Michael Caine and singer EltonJohn wheeled out to serve the propagandists by urging people tohave the DNA-manipulating ÔCovidÕ non-ÕvaccineÕ. The role ofHenry and fellow black celebrities in seeking to coax a ÔvaccineÕreluctant black community into doing the governmentÕs will wasespecially stomach-turning. An emotion-manipulating script andcarefully edited video featuring these black ÔcelebsÕ was such aninsult to the intelligence of black people and whereÕs the self-respectof those involved selling their souls to a fascist government agenda?Henry said he heard black peopleÕs Ôlegitimate worries andconcernsÕ, but people must Ôtrust the factsÕ when they were doingexactly that by not having the ÔvaccineÕ. They had to include theobligatory reference to Black Lives Mat letcoronavirus cost even more black lives Ð because we maÕ. Mygod, it was pathetic. ÔI know the vaccine is safe and what it does.ÕHow? ÔIÕm a comedian and it says so in my script.Õ
SPI-B said social disapproval needed to be carefully managed toavoid victimisation, scapegoating and misdirected criticism, but theyknew that their ÔrecommendationsÕ would lead to exactly that andthe media were speciÞcally used to stir-up the divide-and-conquerhostility. Those who conform like good liwhile those who have seen through the tidal wave of lies areÔCovidiotsÕ. The awake have been abused by the fast asleep for notconforming to fascism and impositions that the awake know aredesigned to endanger their health, dehumanise them, and tearasunder the very fabric of human society. We have had the curtain.twitchers and morons reporting neighbours and others to the face.nappied police for breaking ÔCovid rulesÕ with fascist policedelighting in posting links and phone numbers where this could bedone. The Cult cannot impose its will without a compliant policeand military or a compliant population willing to play their part inenslaving themselves and their kids. The words of a pastor in NaziGermany are so appropriate today:
First they came for the socialists and I did not speak out because I was not a socialist. 
Then they came for the trade unionists and I did not speak out because I was not a trade unionist. 
Then they came for the Jews and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew. 
Then they came for me and there was no one left to speak for me. 
Those who donÕt learn from history are destined to repeat it and somany are.
ÔCovidÕ rules: Rewiring the mind 
With the background laid out to this gigantic national and globalweb of psychological manipulation we can put ÔCovidÕ rules into aclear and sinister perspective. Forget the claims about protectinghealth. ÔCovidÕ rules are about dismantling the human mind,breaking the human spirit, destroying self-respect, and then puHumpty Dumpty together again as a servile, submissive slave. Socialisolation through lockdown and distancing have devastating e.ectson the human psyche as the psychological psychopaths well knowand thatÕs the real reason for them. Humans need contact with eachother, discourse, closeness and touch, or they eventually, andliterarily, go crazy. Masks, which I will address at some length,fundamentally add to the e.ects of isolation and the Cult agenda todehumanise and de-individualise the population. To do this whileknowing Ð in fact seeking Ð this outcome is the very epitome of eviland psychologists involved in this are the epitome of evil. They mustlike all the rest of the Cult demons and their assets stand trial forcrimes against humanity on a scale that deÞes the imagination.Psychopaths in uniform use isolation to break enemy troops andagents and make them subservient and submissive to tell what theyknow. The technique is rightly considered a form of torture andtorture is most certainly what has been imposed on the humanpopulation.
Clinically-insane American psychologist Harry Harlow becamefamous for his isolation experiments in the 1950s in which heseparated baby monkeys from their mothers and imprisoned themfor months on end in a metal container or Ôpit of despairÕ. They soonbegan to show mental distress and depression as any idiot couldhave predicted. Harlow put other monkeys in steel chambers forthree, six or twelve months while denying them any contact withanimals or humans. He said that the e.ects of total social isolationfor six months were Ôso devastating and debilitating that we hadassumed initially that twelve months of isolation would not produceany additional decrementÕ; but twelve months of isolation Ôalmostobliterated the animals sociallyÕ. This is what the Cult and itspsychopaths are doing to you and your children. Even monkeys inpartial isolation in which they were not allowed to formrelationships with other monkeys became Ôaggressive and hostile,not only to others, but also towards their own bodiesÕ. We have seenthis in the young as a consequence of lockdown. UK governmentpsychopaths launched a public relations campaign telling people notto hug each other even aer they received the ÔCovid-19 vaccineÕwhich we were told with more lies would allow a return to ÔnormallifeÕ. A government source told The Telegraph: ÔIt will be along thelines that it is great that you have been vaccinated, but if you aregoing to visit your family and hug your grandchildren there is achance you are going to infect people you love.Õ The source wasapparently speaking from a secure psychiatric facility. Janet Lord,director of Birmingham UniversityÕs Institute of Inßammation andAgeing, said that parents and grandparents should avoid huggingtheir children. Well, how can I put it, Ms Lord? Fuck o.. Yep, thatÕlldo.
Destroying the kids Ð where are the parents? 
Observe what has happened to people enslaved and isolated bylockdown as suicide and self-harm has soared worldwide,particularly among the young denied the freedom to associate withtheir friends. A study of 49,000 people in English-speaking countriesconcluded that almost half of young adults are at clinical risk ofmental health disorders. A national survey in America of 1,000currently enrolled high school and college students found that 5percent reported asuicide during the pandemic. Data fromthe US CDCÕs National Syndromic Surveillance Program fromJanuary 1st to October 17th, 2020, revealed a 31 percent increase inmental health issues among adolescents aged 12 to 17 comparedwith 2019. The CDC reported that America in general su.ered thebiggest drop in life expectancy since World War Two as it fell by ayear in the Þrst half of 2020 as a result of Ôdeaths of despairÕ Ðoverdoses and suicides. Deaths of despair have leapt by more than20 percent during lockdown and include the highest number of fataloverdoses ever recorded in a single year Ð 81,000. Internet addictionis another consequence of being isolated at home which lowersinterest in physical activities as kids fall into inertia and whatÕs thepoint? Children and young people are losing hope and giving up onlife, sometimes literally. A 14-year-old boy killed himself inMaryland because he had Ôgiven upÕ when his school district didnÕtreopen; an 11-year-old boy shot himself during a zoom class; ateenager in Maine succumbed to the isolation of the ÔpandemicÕwhen he ended his life aer experiencing a disrupted senior year atschool. Children as young as nine have taken their life and all thesestories can be repeated around the world. Careers are beingdestroyed before they start and that includes those in sport in whichpromising youngsters have not been able to take part. The plan ofthe psycho-psychologists is working all right. Researchers atCambridge University found that lockdowns cause signiÞcant harmto childrenÕs mental health. Their study was published in theArchives of Disease in Childhood, and followed 168 children agedbetween 7 and 11. The researchers concluded:
During the UK lockdown, childrenÕs depression symptoms have increased substantially, relative to before lockdown. The scale of this effect has direct relevance for the continuation of different elements of lockdown policy, such as complete or partial school closures É 
É Specifically, we observed a statistically significant increase in ratings of depression, with a medium-to-large effect size. Our findings emphasise the need to incorporate the potential impact of lockdown on child mental health in planning the ongoing response to the global pandemic and the recovery from it. 
Not a chance when the CultÕs psycho-psychologists were geexactly what they wanted. The UKÕs Royal College of Paediatrics andChild Health has urged parents to look for signs of eating disordersin children and young people aer a three to four fold increase.Specialists say the ÔpandemicÕ is a major reason behind the rise. YoudonÕt say. The College said isolation from friends during schoolclosures, exam cancellations, loss of extra-curricular activities likesport, and an increased use of social media were all contributoryfactors along with fears about the virus (psycho-psychologistsagain), family Þnances, and students being forced to quarantine.Doctors said young people were becoming severely ill by the timethey were seen with ÔCovidÕ regulations reducing face-to-faceconsultations. Nor is it only the young that have been devastated bythe psychopaths. Like all bullies and cowards the Cult is targetingthe young, elderly, weak and inÞrm. A typical story was told by aBritish lady called Lynn Parker who was not allowed to visit herhusband in 2020 for the last ten and half months of his life Ôwhen heneeded me mostÕ between March 20th and when he died onDecember 19th. This vacates the criminal and enters the territory ofevil. The emotional impact on the immune system alone is immenseas are the number of people of all ages worldwide who have died asa result of Cult-demanded, Gates-demanded, lockdowns.
Isolation is torture 
The experience of imposing solitary conÞnement on millions ofprisoners around the world has shown how a large percentagebecome Ôactively psychotic and/or acutely suicidalÕ. Social isolationhas been found to trigger Ôa speciÞc psychiatric syndrome,characterized by hallucinations; panic aert paranoia;diminished impulse control; hypersensitivity to external stimuli; anddi.culties with thinking, concentration and memoryÕ. Juan Mendez,a United Nations rapporteur (investigator), said that isolation is aform of torture. Research has shown that even aer isolationprisoners Þnd it far more di.cult to make social connections and Iremember chame that when her young son met another child again he had no ideahow to act or what to do. Hannah Flanagan, Director of EmergencyServices at Journey Mental Health Center in Dane County,Wisconsin, said: ÔThe speciÞcity about Covid social distancing andisolation that weÕve come across as contributing factors to thesuicides are really new to us this year.Õ But they are not new to thosethat devised them. They are geant as thepopulation is psychologically dismantled to be rebuilt in a totallydi.erent way. Children and the young are particularly targeted.They will be the adults when the full-on fascist AI-controlledtechnocracy is planned to be imposed and they are being preparedto meekly submit. At the same time older people who still have amemory of what life was like before Ð and how fascist the newnormal really is Ð are being deleted. You are going to see e.orts toturn the young against the old to support this geriatric genocide.Hannah Flanagan said the big increase in suicide in her countyproved that social isolation is not only harmful, but deadly. Studieshave shown that isolation from others is one of the main risk factorsin suicide and even more so with women. Warnings that lockdowncould create a Ôperfect stormÕ for suicide were ignored. Aer all thiswas one of the reasons for lockdown. Suicide, however, is only themost extreme of isolation consequences. There are many others. DrDhruv Khullar, assistant professor of healthcare policy at WeillCornell Medical College, said in a New York Times article in 2016 longbefore the fake ÔpandemicÕ:
A wave of new research suggests social separation is bad for us. Individuals with less social connection have disrupted sleep patterns, altered immune systems, more inflammation and higher levels of stress hormones. One recent study found that isolation increases the risk of heart disease by 29 percent and stroke by 32 percent. Another analysis that pooled data from 70 studies and 3.4 million people found that socially isolated individuals had a 30 percent higher risk of dying in the next seven years, and that this effect was largest in middle age. 
Loneliness can accelerate cognitive decline in older adults, and isolated individuals are twice as likely to die prematurely as those with more robust social interactions. These effects start early: Socially isolated children have significantly poorer health 20 years later, even after controlling for other factors. All told, loneliness is as important a risk factor for early death as obesity and smoking. 
There you have proof from that one article alone four years before2020 that those who have enforced lockdown, social distancing andisolation knew what the e.ect would be and that is even more sowith professional psychologists that have been driving the policyacross the globe. We can go back even further to the years 2000 and2003 and the start of a major study on the e.ects of isolation onhealth by Dr Janine Gronewold and Professor Dirk M. Hermann atthe University Hospital in Essen, Germany, who analysed data on4,316 people with an average age of 59 who were recruited for thelong-term research project. They found that socially isolated peopleare more than 40 percent more likely to have a heart aor other major cardiovascular event and nearly 50 percent morelikely to die from any cause. Given the Þnancial Armageddonunleashed by lockdown we should note that the study found arelationship between increased cardiovascular risk and lack ofÞnancial support. Aer excluding other factors social isolation wasstill connected to a 44 percent increased risk of cardiovascularproblems and a 47 percent increased risk of death by any cause. Lackof Þnancial support was associated with a 30 percent increase in therisk of cardiovascular health events. Dr Gronewold said it had beenknown for some time that feeling lonely or lacking contact with closefriends and family can have an impact on physical health and thestudy had shown that having strong social relationships is of highimportance for heart health. Gronewold said they didnÕt understandyet why people who are socially isolated have such poor healthoutcomes, but this was obviously a worrying Þnding, particularlyduring these times of prolonged social distancing. Well, it can beexplained on many levels. You only have to identify the point in thebody where people feel loneliness and missing people they areparted from Ð itÕs in the centre of the chest where they feel the acheof loneliness and the ache of missing people. ÔMy heart aches foryouÕ É ÔMy heart aches for some company.Õ I will explain this morein the chapter Escaping Wetiko, but when you realise that the bodyis the mind Ð they are expressions of each other Ð the reason whystate of the mind dictates state of the body becomes clear.
American psychologist Ranjit Powar was highlighting the e.ectsof lockdown isolation as early as April, 2020. She said humans haveevolved to be social creatures and are wired to live in interactivegroups. Being isolated from family, friends and colleagues could beunbalancing and traumatic for most people and could result in shortor even long-term psychological and physical health problems. Anincrease in levels of anxiety, aggression, depression, forgetfulnessand hallucinations were possible psychological e.ects of isolation.ÔMental conditions may be precipitated for those with underlyingpre-existing susceptibilities and show up in many others withoutany pre-condition.Õ Powar said personal relationships helped us copewith stress and if we lost this outlet for lecan be a big emotional void which, for an average person, wasdi.cult to deal with. ÔJust a few days of isolation can causeincreased levels of anxiety and depressionÕ Ð so what the hell hasbeen the e.ect on the global population of 18 months of this at thetime of writing? Powar said: ÔAdd to it the looming threat of adreadful disease being repeatedly hammered in through the mediaand you have a recipe for many shades of mental and physicaldistress.Õ For those with a house and a garden it is easy to forget thatbillions have had to endure lockdown isolation in tiny overcrowdedßats and apartments with nowhere to go outside. The psychologicaland physical consequences of this are unimaginable and with lunaticand abusive partners and parents the consequences have led totremendous increases in domestic and child abuse and alcoholism aspeople seek to shut out the horror. Ranjit Powar said:
Staying in a confined space with family is not all a rosy picture for everyone. It can be extremely oppressive and claustrophobic for large low-income families huddled together in small single-room houses. Children here are not lucky enough to have many board/electronic games or books to keep them occupied. 
Add to it the deep insecurity of running out of funds for food and basic necessities. On the other hand, there are people with dysfunctional family dynamics, such as domineering, abusive or alcoholic partners, siblings or parents which makes staying home a period of trial. Incidence of suicide and physical abuse against women has shown a worldwide increase. Heightened anxiety and depression also affect a personÕs immune system, making them more susceptible to illness. 
To think that PowarÕs article was published on April 11th, 2020.
Six-feet fantasy 
Social (unsocial) distancing demanded that people stay six feet ortwo metres apart. UK government advisor Robert Dingwall from theNew and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group saidin a radio interview that the two-metre rule was Ôconjured up out ofnowhereÕ and was not based on science. No, it was not based onmedical science, but it didnÕt come out of nowhere. The distancerelated to psychological science. Six feet/two metres was adopted inmany countries and we were told by people like the criminalAnthony Fauci and his ilk that it was founded on science. Manyschools could not reopen because they did not have the space for six-feet distancing. Then in March, 2021, aer a year of six-feet ÔscienceÕ,a study published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases involving morethan 500,000 students and almost 100,000 sta. over 16 weeksrevealed no signiÞcant di.erence in ÔCovidÕ cases between six feetand three feet and Fauci changed his tune. Now three feet was okay.There is no di.erence between six feet and three inches when there isno ÔvirusÕ and they got away with six feet for psychological reasonsfor as long as they could. I hear journalists and others talk aboutÔunintended consequencesÕ of lockdown. They are not unintended atall; they have been coldly-calculated for a speciÞc outcome of humancontrol and thatÕs why super-psychopaths like Gates have called forthem so vehemently. Super-psychopath psychologists havedemanded them and psychopathic or clueless, spineless, politicianshave gone along with them by Ôfollowing the scienceÕ. But itÕs notscience at all. ÔScienceÕ is not what is; itÕs only what people can bemanipulated to believe it is. The whole ÔCovidÕ catastrophe isfounded on mind control. Three word or three statement mantrasissued by the UK government are a well-known mind controltechnique and so weÕve had ÔStay home/protect the NHS/save livesÕ,ÔStay alert/control the virus/save livesÕ and Ôhands/face/spaceÕ. Oneof the most vocal proponents of extreme ÔCovidÕ rules in the UK hasbeen Professor Susan Michie, a member of the British CommunistParty, who is not a medical professional. Michie is the director of theCentre for Behaviour Change at University College London. She is abehavioural psychologist and another Þlthy rich ÔMarxistÕ who praisedChinaÕs draconian lockdown. She was known by fellow students atOxford University as ÔStalinÕs nannyÕ for her extreme Marxism.Michie is an inßuential member of the UK governmentÕs ScientiÞcAdvisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) and behaviouralmanipulation groups which have dominated ÔCovidÕ policy. She is aconsultant adviser to the World Health Organization on ÔCovid-19Õand behaviour. Why the hell are lockdowns anything to do with herwhen they are claimed to be about health? Why does a behaviouralpsychologist from a group charged with changing the behaviour ofthe public want lockdown, human isolation and mandatory masks?Does that question really need an answer? Michie absolutely has toexplain herself before a Nuremberg court when humanity takes backits world again and even more so when you see the consequences ofmasks that she demands are compulsory. This is a Michie classic:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice. Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks. 
Those words alone should carry a prison sentence when youponder on the callous disregard for children involved and what astatement it makes about the mind and motivations of Susan Michie.What a lovely lady and what she said there encapsulates thementality of the psychopaths behind the ÔCovidÕ horror. Let uscompare what Michie said with a countrywide study in Germanypublished at researchsquare.com involving 25,000 school childrenand 17,854 health complaints submifound that masks are harming children physically, psychologically,and behaviourally with 24 health issues associated with maskwearing. They include: shortness of breath (29.7%); dizziness(26.4%); increased headaches (53%); di.culty concentrating (50%);drowsiness or fatigue (37%); and malaise (42%). Nearly a third ofchildren experienced more sleep issues than before and a quarterdeveloped new fears. Researchers found health issues and otherimpairments in 68 percent of masked children covering their facesfor an average of 4.5 hours a day. Hundreds of those taking partexperienced accelerated respiration, tightness in the chest, weakness,and short-term impairment of consciousness. A reminder of whatMichie said again:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice. Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks. 
Psychopaths in government and psychology now have children andyoung people Ð plus all the adults Ð wearing masks for hours on endwhile clueless teachers impose the will of the psychopaths on theyoung they should be protecting. What the hell are parents doing?
Cult lab rats 
We have some schools already imposing on students microchippedbuzzers that activate when they get Ôtoo closeÕ to their pals in theway they do with lab rats. How apt. To the Cult and its brain-deadservants our children are lab rats being conditioned to beunquestioning, dehumanised slaves for the rest of their lives.Children and young people are being weaned and frightened awayfrom the most natural human instincts including closeness andtouch. I have tracked in the books over the years how schools werebanning pupils from greeting each other with a hug and the wholeCult-induced Me Too movement has terriÞed men and boys from arelaxed and natural interaction with female friends and workcolleagues to the point where many men try never to be in a roomalone with a woman thatÕs not their partner. Airhead celebrities haveas always played their virtue-signalling part in making this happenwith their gross exaggeration. For every monster like HarveyWeinstein there are at least tens of thousands of men that donÕt treatwomen like that; but everyone must be branded the same and policychanged for them as well as the monster. I am going to be using theword ÔdehumaniseÕ many times in this chapter because that is whatthe Cult is seeking to do and it goes very deep as we shall see. DonÕtlet them kid you that social distancing is planned to end one day.ThatÕs not the idea. We are seeing more governments and companiesfunding and producing wearable gadgets to keep people apart andthey would not be doing that if this was meant to be short-term. Atech start-up company backed by GCHQ, the British Intelligence andmilitary surveillance headquarters, has created a social distancingwrist sensor that alerts people when they get too close to others. TheCIA has also supported tech companies developing similar devices.The wearable sensor was developed by Tended, one of a number ofstart-up companies supported by GCHQ (see the CIA and DARPA).The device can be worn on the wrist or as a tag on the waistband andwill vibrate whenever someone wearing the device breaches socialdistancing and gets anywhere near natural human contact. Thecompany had a lucky break in that it was developing a distancingsensor when the ÔCovidÕ hoax arrived which immediately provided apotentially enormous market. How fortunate. The government inbig-time Cult-controlled Ontario in Canada is investing $2.5 millionin wearable contact tracing technology that Ôwill alert users if theymay have been exposed to the Covid-19 in the workplace and willbeep or vibrate if they are within six feet of another personÕ.Facedrive Inc., the technology company behind this, was founded in2016 with funding from the Ontario Together Fund and obviouslythey, too, had a prophet on the board of directors. The humansurveillance and control technology is called TraceSCAN and wouldbe worn by the human cyborgs in places such as airports,workplaces, construction sites, care homes and É schools.
I emphasise schools with children and young people the primetargets. You know what is planned for society as a whole if you keepyour eyes on the schools. They have always been places where thestate program the next generation of slaves to be its compliantworker-ants Ð or Woker-ants these days; but in the mist of theÔCovidÕ madness they have been transformed into mind laboratorieson a scale never seen before. Teachers and head teachers are just asprogrammed as the kids Ð oen more so. Children are kept apartfrom human interaction by walk lanes, classroom distancing,staggered meal times, masks, and the rolling-out of buzzer systems.Schools are now physically laid out as a laboratory maze for lab-rats.Lunatics at a school in Anchorage, Alaska, who should beprosecuted for child abuse, took away desks and forced children tokneel (know your place) on a mat for Þve hours a day while wearinga mask and using their chairs as a desk. How this was supposed toimpact on a ÔvirusÕ only these clinically insane people can tell youand even then it would be clap-trap. The school banned recess(interaction), art classes (creativity), and physical exercise (gebody and mind moving out of inertia). Everyone behind this outrageshould be in jail or bemanipulators are all for this dystopian approach to schools.Professor Susan Michie, the mind-doctor and British CommunistParty member, said it was wrong to say that schools were safe. Theyhad to be made so by ÔdistancingÕ, masks and ventilation (siday in the cold). I must ask this lady round for dinner on a night Iknow I am going to be out and not back for weeks. She probablywouldnÕt be able to make it, anyway, with all the visits to her ownpsychologist she must have block-booked.
Masking identity 
I know how shocking it must be for you that a behaviourmanipulator like Michie wants everyone to wear masks which havelong been a feature of mind-control programs like the infamousMKUltra in the United States, but, there we are. We live and learn. Ispent many years from 1996 to right across the millenniumresearching mind control in detail on both sides of the Atlantic andelsewhere. I met a large number of mind-control survivors andmany had been held captive in body and mind by MKUltra. MKstands for mind-control, but employs the German spelling indeference to the Nazis spirited out of Germany at the end of WorldWar Two by Operation Paperclip in which the US authorities, withhelp from the Vatican, transported Nazi mind-controllers andengineers to America to continue their work. Many of them werebehind the creation of NASA and they included Nazi scientist andSS o.cer Wernher von Braun who swapped designing V-2 rockets tobombard London with designing the Saturn V rockets that poweredthe NASA moon programmeÕs Apollo cra. I think I may havementioned that the Cult has no borders. Among Paperclip escapeeswas Josef Mengele, the Angel of Death in the Nazi concentrationcamps where he conducted mind and genetic experiments onchildren oen using twins to provide a control twin to measure theimpact of his ÔworkÕ on the other. If you want to observe the Cultmentality in all its extremes of evil then look into the life of Mengele.I have met many people who su.ered mercilessly under Mengele inthe United States where he operated under the name Dr Greene andbecame a stalwart of MKUltra programming and torture. Among hislocations was the underground facility in the Mojave Desert inCalifornia called the China Lake Naval Weapons Station which isalmost entirely below the surface. My books The Biggest Secret, Children of the Matrix and The Perception Deception have the detailedbackground to MKUltra.
The best-known MKUltra survivor is American Cathy OÕBrien. IÞrst met her and her late partner Mark Phillips at a conference inColorado in 1996. Mark helped her escape and deprogram fromdecades of captivity in an o.shoot of MKUltra known as ProjectMonarch in which Ôsex slavesÕ were provided for the rich andfamous including Father George Bush, Dick Cheney and theClintons. Read Cathy and MarkÕs book Trance-Formation of America and if you are new to this you will be shocked to the core. I read it in1996 shortly before, with the usual synchronicity of my life, I foundmyself given a book table at the conference right next to hers.MKUltra never ended despite being very publicly exposed (only asmall part of it) in the 1970s and continues in other guises. I am stillin touch with Cathy. She contacted me during 2020 aer masksbecame compulsory in many countries to tell me how they wereused as part of MKUltra programming. I had been observing ÔCovidregulationsÕ and the relationship between authority and public formonths. I saw techniques that I knew were employed on individualsin MKUltra being used on the global population. I had read manybooks and manuals on mind control including one called Silent Weapons for Quiet Wars which came to light in the 1980s and was aguide on how to perceptually program on a mass scale. ÔSilentWeaponsÕ refers to mind-control. I remembered a line from themanual as governments, medical authorities and law enforcementagencies have so obviously talked to Ð or rather at Ð the adultpopulation since the ÔCovidÕ hoax began as if they are children. Thedocument said:
If a person is spoken to by a T.V. advertiser as if he were a twelve-year-old, then, due to suggestibility, he will, with a certain probability, respond or react to that suggestion with the uncritical response of a twelve-year-old and will reach in to his economic reservoir and deliver its energy to buy that product on impulse when he passes it in the store. 
ThatÕs why authority has spoken to adults like children since all thisbegan.
Why did Michael Jackson wear masks? 
Every aspect of the ÔCovidÕ narrative has mind-control as its centraltheme. Cathy OÕBrien wrote an article for davidicke.com about theconnection between masks and mind control. Her daughter Kellywho I Þrst met in the 1990s was born while Cathy was still heldcaptive in MKUltra. Kelly was forced to wear a mask as part of herprogramming from the age of two to dehumanise her, target hersense of individuality and reduce the amount of oxygen her brainand body received. Bingo. This is the real reason for compulsorymasks, why they have been enforced en masse, and why they seek toincrease the number they demand you wear. First one, then two,with one disgraceful alleged ÔdoctorÕ recommending four which isnothing less than a death sentence. Where and how oen they mustbe worn is being expanded for the purpose of mass mind controland damaging respiratory health which they can call ÔCovid-19Õ.CanadaÕs government headed by the man-child Justin Trudeau, saysitÕs Þne for children of two and older to wear masks. An insaneÔstudyÕ in Italy involving just 47 children concluded there was noproblem for babies as young as four months wearing them. Even aerpeople were ÔvaccinatedÕ they were still told to wear masks by thecriminal that is Anthony Fauci. Cathy wrote that mandating masksis allowing the authorities literally to control the air we breathewhich is what was done in MKUltra. You might recall how thesinger Michael Jackson wore masks and there is a reason for that. Hewas subjected to MKUltra mind control through Project Monarchand his psyche was scrambled by these simpletons. Cathy wrote:
In MKUltra Project Monarch mind control, Michael Jackson had to wear a mask to silence his voice so he could not reach out for help. Remember how he developed that whisper voice when he wasnÕt singing? Masks control the mind from the outside in, like the redefining of words is doing. By controlling what we can and cannot say for fear of being labeled racist or beaten, for example, it ultimately controls thought that drives our words and ultimately actions (or lack thereof). 
Likewise, a mask muffles our speech so that we are not heard, which controls voice É words É mind. This is Mind Control. Masks are an obvious mind control device, and I am disturbed so many people are complying on a global scale. Masks depersonalize while making a person feel as though they have no voice. It is a barrier to others. People who would never choose to comply but are forced to wear a mask in order to keep their job, and ultimately their family fed, are compromised. They often feel shame and are subdued. People have stopped talking with each other while media controls the narrative. 
The Ôno voiceÕ theme has oen become literal with trainpassengers told not to speak to each other in case they pass on theÔvirusÕ, singing banned for the same reason and bonkers Californiao.cials telling people riding roller coasters that they cannot shoutand scream. Cathy said she heard every day from healed MKUltrasurvivors who cannot wear a mask without ßashing back on waystheir breathing was controlled Ð Ôfrom ball gags and penises to waterboardingÕ. She said that through the years when she saw images ofpeople in China wearing masks Ôdue to pollutionÕ that it was reallyto control their oxygen levels. ÔI knew it was as much of a populationcontrol mechanism of depersonalisation as are burkasÕ, she said.Masks are another Chinese communist/fascist method of control thathas been swept across the West as the West becomes China atlightning speed since we entered 2020.
Mask-19 
There are other reasons for mandatory masks and these includedestroying respiratory health to call it ÔCovid-19Õ and stunting braindevelopment of children and the young. Dr Margarite Griesz-Brisson MD, PhD, is a Consultant Neurologist andNeurophysiologist and the Founder and Medical Director of theLondon Neurology and Pain Clinic. Her CV goes down the streetand round the corner. She is clearly someone who cares about peopleand wonÕt parrot the propaganda. Griesz-Brisson has a PhD inpharmacology, with special interest in neurotoxicology,environmental medicine, neuroregeneration and neuroplasticity (theway the brain can change in the light of information received). Shewent public in October, 2020, with a passionate warning about thee.ects of mask-wearing laws:
The reinhalation of our exhaled air will without a doubt create oxygen deficiency and a flooding of carbon dioxide. We know that the human brain is very sensitive to oxygen deprivation. There are nerve cells for example in the hippocampus that canÕt be longer than 3 minutes without oxygen Ð they cannot survive. The acute warning symptoms are headaches, drowsiness, dizziness, issues in concentration, slowing down of reaction time Ð reactions of the cognitive system. 
Oh, I know, letÕs tell bus, truck and taxi drivers to wear them andpeople working machinery. How about pilots, doctors and police?Griesz-Brisson makes the important point that while the symptomsshe mentions may fade as the body readjusts this does not alter thefact that people continue to operate in oxygen deÞcit with long list ofpotential consequences. She said it was well known thatneurodegenerative diseases take years or decades to develop. ÔIftoday you forget your phone number, the breakdown in your brainwould have already started 20 or 30 years ago.Õ She saiddegenerative processes in your brain are geouroxygen deprivation continues through wearing a mask. Nerve cellsin the brain are unable to divide themselves normally in thesecircumstances and lost nerve cells will no longer be regenerated.ÔWhat is gone is gone.Õ Now consider that people like shop workersand schoolchildren are wearing masks for hours every day. What inthe name of sanity is going to be happening to them? ÔI do not weara mask, I need my brain to thinkÕ, Griesz-Brisson said, ÔI want tohave a clear head when I deal with my patients and not be in acarbon dioxide-induced anaesthesiaÕ. If you are told to wear a maskanywhere ask the organisation, police, store, whatever, for their riskassessment on the dangers and negative e.ects on mind and body ofenforcing mask-wearing. They wonÕt have one because it has neverbeen done not even by government. All of them must be subject toclass-action lawsuits as the consequences come to light. They donÕtdo mask risk assessments for an obvious reason. They know whatthe conclusions would be and independent scientiÞc studies thathave been done tell a horror story of consequences.
ÔMasks are criminalÕ 
Dr Griesz-Brisson said that for children and adolescents, masks arean absolute no-no. They had an extremely active and adaptiveimmune system and their brain was incredibly active with so muchto learn. ÔThe childÕs brain, or the youthÕs brain, is thirsting foroxygen.Õ The more metabolically active an organ was, the moreoxygen it required; and in children and adolescents every organ wasmetabolically active. Griesz-Brisson said that to deprive a childÕs oradolescentÕs brain of oxygen, or to restrict it in any way, was not onlydangerous to their health, it was absolutely criminal. ÔOxygendeÞciency inhibits the development of the brain, and the damagethat has taken place as a result CANNOT be reversed.Õ Mindmanipulators of MKUltra put masks on two-year-olds they wantedto neurologically rewire and you can see why. Griesz-Brisson said achild needs the brain to learn and the brain needs oxygen tofunction. ÔWe donÕt need a clinical study for that. This is simple,indisputable physiology.Õ Consciously and purposely inducedoxygen deÞciency was an absolutely deliberate health hazard, andan absolute medical contraindication which means that Ôthis drug,this therapy, this method or measure should not be used, and is notallowed to be usedÕ. To coerce an entire population to use anabsolute medical contraindication by force, she said, there had to bedeÞnite and serious reasons and the reasons must be presented tocompetent interdisciplinary and independent bodies to be veriÞedand authorised. She had this warning of the consequences that werecoming if mask wearing continued:
When, in ten years, dementia is going to increase exponentially, and the younger generations couldnÕt reach their god-given potential, it wonÕt help to say Ôwe didnÕt need the masksÕ. I know how damaging oxygen deprivation is for the brain, cardiologists know how damaging it is for the heart, pulmonologists know how damaging it is for the lungs. Oxygen deprivation damages every single organ. Where are our health departments, our health insurance, our medical associations? It would have been their duty to be vehemently against the lockdown and to stop it and stop it from the very beginning. 
Why do the medical boards issue punishments to doctors who give people exemptions? Does the person or the doctor seriously have to prove that oxygen deprivation harms people? What kind of medicine are our doctors and medical associations representing? Who is responsible for this crime? The ones who want to enforce it? The ones who let it happen and play along, or the ones who donÕt prevent it? 
All of the organisations and people she mentions there eitheranswer directly to the Cult or do whatever hierarchical levels abovethem tell them to do. The outcome of both is the same. ÔItÕs not aboutmasks, itÕs not about viruses, itÕs certainly not about your healthÕ,Griesz-Brisson said. ÔIt is about much, much more. I am notparticipating. I am not afraid.Õ They were taking our air to breatheand there was no unfounded medical exemption from face masks.Oxygen deprivation was dangerous for every single brain. It had tobe the free decision of every human being whether they want towear a mask that was absolutely ine.ective to protect themselvesfrom a virus. She ended by rightly identifying where theresponsibility lies for all this:
The imperative of the hour is personal responsibility. We are responsible for what we think, not the media. We are responsible for what we do, not our superiors. We are responsible for our health, not the World Health Organization. And we are responsible for what happens in our country, not the government. 
Halle-bloody-lujah.
But surgeons wear masks, right? 
Independent studies of mask-wearing have produced a long list ofreports detailing mental, emotional and physical dangers. What adeÞnition of insanity to see police o.cers imposing mask-wearingon the public which will cumulatively damage their health while thepolice themselves wear masks that will cumulatively damage their health. ItÕs uÔthe government says soÕ Ð yes a government of brain-donor idiotslike UK Health Secretary MascienceÕ scripts of psychopathic, lunatic psychologists. The responseyou get from Stockholm syndrome su.erers defending the veryauthorities that are destroying them and their families is thatÔsurgeons wear masksÕ. This is considered the game, set and matchthat they must work and donÕt cause oxygen deÞcit. Well, actually,scientiÞc studies have shown that they do and oxygen levels aremonitored in operating theatres to compensate. Surgeons wearmasks to stop spiounds Ð notto stop Ôviral particlesÕ which are so miniscule they can only be seenthrough an electron microscope. Holes in the masks are signiÞcantlybigger than Ôviral particlesÕ and if you sneeze or cough they willbreach the mask. I watched an incredibly disingenuous ÔexperimentÕthat claimed to prove that masks work in catching ÔvirusÕ materialfrom the mouth and nose. They did this with a slow motion cameraand the mask did block big stu. which stayed inside the mask andagainst the face to be breathed in or cause infections on the face aswe have seen with many children. ÔViral particlesÕ, however, wouldnever have been picked up by the camera as they came through themask when they are far too small to be seen. The ÔexperimentÕ wastherefore disingenuous and useless.
Studies have concluded that wearing masks in operating theatres(and thus elsewhere) make no di.erence to preventing infectionwhile the opposite is true with toxic shite building up in the maskand this had led to an explosion in tooth decay and gum diseasedubbed by dentists Ômask mouthÕ. You might have seen the Internetvideo of a furious American doctor urging people to take o. theirmasks aer a four-year-old patient had been rushed to hospital thenight before and nearly died with a lung infection that doctorssourced to mask wearing. A study in the journal Cancer Discovery found that inhalation of harmful microbes can contribute toadvanced stage lung cancer in adults and long-term use of maskscan help breed dangerous pathogens. Microbiologists have saidfrequent mask wearing creates a moist environment in whichmicrobes can grow and proliferate before entering the lungs. TheCanadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, or CADTH,a Canadian national organisation that provides research andanalysis to healthcare decision-makers, said this as long ago as 2013in a report entitled ÔUse of Surgical Masks in the Operating Room: AReview of the Clinical E.ectiveness and GuidelinesÕ. It said:
¥
No evidence was found to support the use of surgical face masksto reduce the frequency of surgical site infections

¥
No evidence was found on the e.ectiveness of wearing surgicalface masks to protect sta. from infectious material in theoperating room.

¥
Guidelines recommend the use of surgical face masks by sta. inthe operating room to protect both operating room sta. andpatients (despite the lack of evidence).


We were told that the world could go back to ÔnormalÕ with thearrival of the ÔvaccinesÕ. When they came, fraudulent as they are, thestory changed as I knew that it would. We are in the midst oftransforming ÔnormalÕ, not going back to it. Mary Ramsay, head ofimmunisation at Public Health England, echoed the words of UScriminal Anthony Fauci who said masks and other regulations muststay no maaccinated. The Fauci idiot continued towear two masks Ð di.erent colours so both could be clearly seen Ðaer he claimed to have been vaccinated. Senator Rand Paul toldFauci in one exchange that his double-masks were ÔtheatreÕ and hewas right. ItÕs all theatre. Mary Ramsay back-tracked on the vaccine-return-to-normal theme when she said the public may need to wearmasks and social-distance for years despite the jabs. ÔPeople have gotused to those lower-level restrictions now, and [they] can live withthemÕ, she said telling us what the idea has been all along. ÔThevaccine does not give you a pass, even if you have had it, you mustcontinue to follow all the guidelinesÕ said a Public Health Englandstatement which reneged on what we had been told before andmade having the ÔvaccineÕ irrelevant to ÔnormalityÕ even by theo.cial story. SpainÕs fascist government trumped everyone bypassing a law mandating the wearing of masks on the beach andeven when swimming in the sea. The move would have devastatedwhatÕs le of the Spanish tourist industry, posed potential breathingdangers to swimmers and had Northern European sunbatherswalking around with their forehead brown and the rest of their facewhite as a sheet. The ruling was so crazy that it had to be retractedaer pressure from public and tourist industry, but it conÞrmedwhere the Cult wants to go with masks and how clinically insaneauthority has become. The determination to make masks permanentand hide the serious dangers to body and mind can be seen in thecensorship of scientist Professor Denis Rancourt by Bill Gates-funded academic publishing website ResearchGate over his papersexposing the dangers and uselessness of masks. Rancourt said:
ResearchGate today has permanently locked my account, which I have had since 2015. Their reasons graphically show the nature of their attack against democracy, and their corruption of 
science É By their obscene non-logic, a scientific review of science articles reporting on harms caused by face masks has a Ôpotential to cause harmÕ. No criticism of the psychological device (face masks) is tolerated, if the said criticism shows potential to influence public policy. 
This is what happens in a fascist world.
Where are the ÔgreensÕ (again)? 
Other dangers of wearing masks especially regularly relate to theinhalation of minute plastic Þbres into the lungs and the deluge ofdiscarded masks in the environment and oceans. Estimatespredicted that more than 1.5 billion disposable masks will end up inthe worldÕs oceans every year polluting the water with tons of plasticand endangering marine wildlife. Studies project that humans areusing 129 billion face masks each month worldwide Ð about threemillion a minute. Most are disposable and made from plastic, non-biodegradable microÞbers that break down into smaller plasticparticles that become widespread in ecosystems. They are licities, clogging sewage channels and turning up in bodies of water. Ihave wrimicroplastics from endless sources now being absorbed into thebody. Rolf Halden, director of the Arizona State University (ASU)Biodesign Center for Environmental Health Engineering, was thesenior researcher in a 2020 study that analysed 47 human tissuesamples and found microplastics in all of them. ÔWe have detectedthese chemicals of plastics in every single organ that we haveinvestigatedÕ, he said. I wrote in The Answer about the world beingdeluged with microplastics. A study by the Worldwide Fund forNature (WWF) found that people are consuming on average everyweek some 2,000 tiny pieces of plastic mostly through water and alsothrough marine life and the air. Every year humans are ingestingenough microplastics to Þll a heaped dinner plate and in a life-timeof 79 years it is enough to Þll two large waste bins. MarcoLambertini, WWF International director general said: ÔNot only areplastics polluting our oceans and waterways and killing marine life ÐitÕs in all of us and we canÕt escape consuming plastics,Õ Americangeologists found tiny plastic Þbres, beads and shards in rainwatersamples collected from the remote slopes of the Rocky MountainNational Park near Denver, Colorado. Their report was headed: ÔIt israining plastic.Õ Rachel Adams, senior lecturer in Biomedical Scienceat Cardi. Metropolitan University, said that among healthconsequences are internal inßammation and immune responses to aÔforeign bodyÕ. She further pointed out that microplastics becomecarriers of toxins including mercury, pesticides and dioxins (aknown cause of cancer and reproductive and developmentalproblems). These toxins accumulate in the faenter the body through microplastics. Now this is beingcompounded massively by people puthrowing it away.
Workers exposed to polypropylene plastic Þbres known as ÔßockÕhave developed Ôßock workerÕs lungÕ from inhaling small pieces ofthe ßock Þbres which can damage lung tissue, reduce breathingcapacity and exacerbate other respiratory problems. Now Écommonly used surgical masks have three layers of melt-blowntextiles made of É polypropylene. We have billions of peoplepuhours at a time day aer day in the form of masks. How doesanyone think that will work out? I mean Ð what could possibly gowrong? We posted a number of scientiÞc studies on this atdavidicke.com, but when I went back to them as I was writing thisbook the links to the science research website where they werehosted were dead. Anything that challenges the o.cial narrative inany way is either censored or viliÞed. The o.cial narrative is sounsupportable by the evidence that only deleting the truth canprotect it. A study by Chinese scientists still survived Ð with theusual twist which it why it was still active, I guess. Yes, they foundthat virtually all the masks they tested increased the daily intake ofmicroplastic Þbres, but people should still wear them because thedanger from the ÔvirusÕ was worse said the crazy ÔteamÕ from theInstitute of Hydrobiology in Wuhan. Scientists Þrst discoveredmicroplastics in lung tissue of some patients who died of lung cancerin the 1990s. Subsequent studies have conÞrmed the potential healthdamage with the plastic degrading slowly and remaining in thelungs to accumulate in volume. Wuhan researchers used a machinesimulating human breathing to establish that masks shed up tonearly 4,000 microplastic Þbres in a month with reused masksproducing more. Scientists said some masks are laced with toxicchemicals and a variety of compounds seriously restricted for bothhealth and environmental reasons. They include cobalt (used in bluedye) and formaldehyde known to cause watery eyes, burningsensations in the eyes, nose, and throat, plus coughing, wheezingand nausea. No Ð that must be ÔCovid-19Õ.
Mask ÔwormsÕ 
There is another and potentially even more sinister content of masks.Mostly new masks of di.erent makes Þlmed under a microscopearound the world have been found to contain strange black Þbres orÔwormsÕ that appear to move or ÔcrawlÕ by themselves and react toheat and water. The nearest I have seen to them are the self-replicating Þbres that are pulled out through the skin of thosesu.ering from Morgellons disease which has been connected to thephenomena of ÔchemtrailsÕ which I will bring into the story later on.Morgellons Þbres continue to grow outside the body and have aform of artiÞcial intelligence. Black ÔwormÕ Þbres in masks have thatkind of feel to them and there is a nanotechnology technique calledÔworm micellesÕ which carry and release drugs or anything else youwant to deliver to the body. For sure the suppression of humanity bymind altering drugs is the Cult agenda big time and the moreexcuses they can Þnd to gain access to the body the moreopportunities there are to make that happen whether throughÔvaccinesÕ or masks pushed against the mouth and nose for hours onend.
So let us summarise the pros and cons of masks:Against masks: Breathing in your own carbon dioxide; depriving thebody and brain of su.cient oxygen; build-up of toxins in the maskthat can be breathed into the lungs and cause rashes on the face andÔmask-mouthÕ; breathing microplastic Þbres and toxic chemicals intothe lungs; dehumanisation and deleting individualisation by literallymaking people faceless; destroying human emotional interactionthrough facial expression and deleting parental connection withtheir babies which look for guidance to their facial expression.
For masks: They donÕt protect you from a ÔvirusÕ that doesnÕt existand even if it did ÔviralÕ particles are so minute they are smaller thanthe holes in the mask.
Governments, police, supermarkets, businesses, transportcompanies, and all the rest who seek to impose masks have done norisk assessment on their consequences for health and psychologyand are now open to group lawsuits when the impact becomes clearwith a cumulative epidemic of respiratory and other disease.Authorities will try to exploit these e.ects and hide the real cause bydubbing them ÔCovid-19Õ. Can you imagine sepopulation to wear health-destroying masks without doing anyassessment of the risks? It is criminal and it is evil, but then howmany people targeted in this way, who see their children told towear them all day at school, have asked for a risk assessment?Billions canÕt be imposed upon by the few unless the billions allow it.Oh, yes, with just a tinge of irony, 85 percent of all masks madeworldwide come from China.
Wash your hands in toxic shite 
ÔCovidÕ rules include the use of toxic sanitisers and again the healthconsequences of constantly applying toxins to be absorbed throughthe skin is obvious to any level of Renegade Mind. AmericaÕs Foodand Drug Administration (FDA) said that sanitisers are drugs andissued a warning about 75 dangerous brands which containmethanol used in antifreeze and can cause death, kidney damageand blindness. The FDA circulated the following warning even forthose brands that it claims to be safe:
Store hand sanitizer out of the reach of pets and children, and children should use it only with adult supervision. Do not drink hand sanitizer. This is particularly important for young children, especially toddlers, who may be attracted by the pleasant smell or brightly colored bottles of hand sanitizer. 
Drinking even a small amount of hand sanitizer can cause alcohol poisoning in children. (However, there is no need to be concerned if your children eat with or lick their hands after using hand sanitizer.) During this coronavirus pandemic, poison control centers have had an increase in calls about accidental ingestion of hand sanitizer, so it is important that adults monitor young childrenÕs use. 
Do not allow pets to swallow hand sanitizer. If you think your pet has eaten something potentially dangerous, call your veterinarian or a pet poison control center right away. Hand sanitizer is flammable and should be stored away from heat and flames. When using hand sanitizer, rub your hands until they feel completely dry before performing activities that may involve heat, sparks, static electricity, or open flames. 
There you go, perfectly safe, then, and thatÕs without even a mentionof the toxins absorbed through the skin. Come on kids Ð sanitiseyour hands everywhere you go. It will save you from the ÔvirusÕ. Putall these elements together of the ÔCovidÕ normal and see how muchhealth and psychology is being cumulatively damaged, evendevastated, to Ôprotect your healthÕ. Makes sense, right? They areonly imposing these things because they care, right? Right? 
Submitting to insanity 
Psychological reframing of the population goes very deep and isdone in many less obvious ways. I hear people say howcontradictory and crazy ÔCovidÕ rules are and how they are everchanging. This is explained away by dismissing those involved asidiots. It is a big mistake. The Cult is delighted if its cold calculationis perceived as incompetence and idiocy when it is anything but. Oh,yes, there are idiots within the system Ð lots of them Ð but they areadministering the Cult agenda, mostly unknowingly. They are notdeciding and dictating it. The bulwark against tyranny is self.respect, always has been, always will be. It is self-respect that hasbroken every tyranny in history. By its very nature self-respect willnot bow to oppression and its perpetrators. There is so lirespect that itÕs always the few that overturn dictators. Many mayeventually follow, but the few with the iron spines (self-respect) kickit o. and generate the momentum. The Cult targets self-respect inthe knowledge that once this has gone only submission remains.Crazy, contradictory, ever-changing ÔCovidÕ rules are systematicallyapplied by psychologists to delete self-respect. They want you to seethat the rules make no sense. It is one thing to decide to dosomething when you have made the choice based on evidence andlogic. You still retain your self-respect. It is quite another when youcan see what you are being told to do is insane, ridiculous andmakes no sense, and yet you still do it. Your self-respect isextinguished and this has been happening as ever more obviouslystupid and nonsensical things have been demanded and the greatmajority have complied even when they can see they are stupid andnonsensical.
People walk around in face-nappies knowing they are damagingtheir health and make no di.erence to a ÔvirusÕ. They do it in fear ofnot doing it. I know itÕs da, but IÕll do it anyway. When thathappens something dies inside of you and submissive reframing hasbegun. Next thereÕs a need to hide from yourself that you haveconceded your self-respect and you convince yourself that you havenot really submiou begin to believethat you are complying with craziness because itÕs the right thing todo. When Þrst you concede your self-respect of 2+2 = 4 to 2+2 = 5 youknow you are compromising your self-respect. Gradually to avoidfacing that fact you begin to believe that 2+2=5. You have beenreframed and I have been watching this process happening in thehuman psyche on an industrial scale. The Cult is working to breakyour spirit and one of its major tools in that war is humiliation. Iread how former American soldier Bradley Manning (later ChelseaManning aer a sex-change) was treated aer being jailed forsupplying WikiLeaks with documents exposing the enormity ofgovernment and elite mendacity. Manning was isolated in solitaryconÞnement for eight months, put under 24-hour surveillance,forced to hand over clothing before going to bed, and stand nakedfor every roll call. This is systematic humiliation. The introduction ofanal swab ÔCovidÕ tests in China has been done for the same reasonto delete self-respect and induce compliant submission. Anal swabsare mandatory for incoming passengers in parts of China andAmerican diplomats have said they were forced to undergo theindignity which would have been calculated humiliation by theCult-owned Chinese government that has America in its sights.
Government-people: An abusive relationship 
Spirit-breaking psychological techniques include giving people hopeand apparent respite from tyranny only to take it away again. Thishappened in the UK during Christmas, 2020, when the psycho-psychologists and their political lackeys announced an easing ofrestrictions over the holiday only to reimpose them almostimmediately on the basis of yet another lie. There is a bigpsychological di.erence between gebeing given hope of relief only to have that dashed. Psychologistsknow this and we have seen the technique used repeatedly. Thenthere is traumatising people before you introduce more extremeregulations that require compliance. A perfect case was theannouncement by the dark and sinister Whiallance in theUK that Ônew dataÕ predicted that 4,000 could die every day over thewinter of 2020/2021 if we did not lockdown again. I think they call itlying and aer traumatising people with that claim out cameJackboot Johnson the next day with new curbs on human freedom.Psychologists know that a frightened and traumatised mindbecomes suggestable to submission and behaviour reframing.Underpinning all this has been to make people fearful andsuspicious of each other and see themselves as a potential danger toothers. In league with deleted self-respect you have the perfectpsychological recipe for self-loathing. The relationship betweenauthority and public is now demonstrably the same as that ofsubservience to an abusive partner. These are signs of an abusiverelationship explained by psychologist Leslie Becker-Phelps:
Psychological and emotional abuse: Undermining a partnerÕsself-worth with verbal aHumiliating the partner in public, unjustly accusing them of havingan a.air, or interrogating them about their every behavior. Keepingpartner confused or o. balance by saying they were just kidding orblaming the partner for ÔmakingÕ them act this way É Feigning inpublic that they care while turning against them in private. Thisleads to victims frequently feeling confused, incompetent, unworthy,hopeless, and chronically self-doubting. [Apply these techniques tohow governments have treated the population since New Year, 2020,and the parallels are obvious.]
Physical abuse: The abuser might physically harm their partner ina range of ways, such as grabbing, hithem. They might throw objects at them or harm them with aweapon. [Observe the physical harm imposed by masks, lockdown,and so on.]
Threats and intimidation: One way abusers keep their partners inline is by instilling fear. They might be verbally threatening, or givethreatening looks or gestures. Abusers oen make it known thatthey are tracking their partnerÕs every move. They might destroytheir partnerÕs possessions, threaten to harm them, or threaten toharm their family members. Not surprisingly, victims of this abuseoen feel anxiety, fear, and panic. [No words necessary.]
Isolation: Abusers oen limit their partnerÕs activities, forbiddingthem to talk or interact with friends or family. They might limitaccess to a car or even turn o. their phone. All of this might be doneby physically holding them against their will, but is oenaccomplished through psychological abuse and intimidation. Themore isolated a person feels, the fewer resources they have to helpgain perspective on their situation and to escape from it. [No wordsnecessary.]
Economic abuse: Abusers oen make their partners beholden tothem for money by controlling access to funds of any kind. Theymight prevent their partner from gemoney they earn from a job. This creates Þnancial dependency thatmakes leaving the relationship very di.cult. [See destruction oflivelihoods and the proposed meagre Ôguaranteed incomeÕ so long asyou do whatever you are told.]
Using children: An abuser might disparage their partnerÕsparenting skills, tell their children lies about their partner, threatento take custody of their children, or threaten to harm their children.These tactics instil fear and oen elicit compliance. [See reframedsocial service maÞa and how children are being mercilessly abusedby the state over ÔCovidÕ while their parents look on too frightenedto do anything.]
A further recurring trait in an abusive relationship is the abusedblaming themselves for their abuse and making excuses for theabuser. We have the public blaming each other for lockdown abuseby government and many making excuses for the government whileaernment. How oen we haveheard authorities say that rules are being imposed or reimposed onlybecause people have refused to ÔbehaveÕ and follow the rules. WedonÕt want to do it Ð itÕs you.
Renegade Minds are an antidote to all of these things. They willnever concede their self-respect no maEven when apparent humiliation is heaped upon them they laugh inits face and reßect back the humiliation on the abuser where itbelongs. Renegade Minds will never wear masks they know are onlyimposed to humiliate, suppress and damage both physically andpsychologically. Consequences will take care of themselves and theywill never break their spirit or cause them to concede to tyranny. UKnewspaper columnist Peter Hitchens was one of the few in themainstream media to speak out against lockdowns and forcedvaccinations. He then announced he had taken the jab. He wanted tosee family members abroad and he believed vaccine passports wereinevitable even though they had not yet been introduced. Hitchenshas a questioning and critical mind, but not a Renegade one. If hehad no amount of pressure would have made him concede. Hitchensexcused his action by saying that the baMinds never accept defeat when freedom is at stake and even if theyare the last one standing the self-respect of not submiis more important than any outcome or any consequence.
ThatÕs why Renegade Minds are the only minds that ever changedanything worth changing.
CHAPTER EIGHT 
ÔReframingÕ insanity 
Insanity is relative. It depends on who has who locked in what cage 
Ray Bradbury 
ÔReframingÕ a mind means simply to change its perception andbehaviour. This can be done subconsciously to such an extentthat subjects have no idea they have been ÔreframedÕ while to anyobserver changes in behaviour and a
Human society is being reframed on a ginormous scale since thestart of 2020 and here we have the reason why psychologists ratherthan doctors have been calling the shots. Ask most people who havesuccumbed to ÔCovidÕ reframing if they have changed and most willsay ÔnoÕ; but they have and fundamentally. The CultÕs long-game hasbeen preparing for these times since way back and crucial to that hasbeen to prepare both population and o.cialdom mentally andemotionally. To use the mind-control parlance they had to reframethe population with a mentality that would submit to fascism andreframe those in government and law enforcement to imposefascism or at least go along with it. The result has been the fact-deleted mindlessness of ÔWokenessÕ and o.cialdom that has eitherenthusiastically or unquestioningly imposed global tyrannydemanded by reframed politicians on behalf of psychopathic anddeeply evil cultists. ÔCognitive reframingÕ identiÞes and challengesthe way someone sees the world in the form of situations,experiences and emotions and then restructures those perceptions toview the same set of circumstances in a di.erent way. This can havebeneÞts if the ae while on the otherside it has the potential for individual and collective mind controlwhich the subject has no idea has even happened.
Cognitive therapy was developed in the 1960s by Aaron T. Beckwho was born in Rhode Island in 1921 as the son of Jewishimmigrants from the Ukraine. He became interested in thetechniques as a treatment for depression. BeckÕs daughter Judith S.Beck is prominent in the same Þeld and they founded the BeckInstitute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy in Philadelphia in 1994.Cognitive reframing, however, began to be used worldwide by thosewith a very dark agenda. The Cult reframes politicians to changetheir awhat they once appeared to stand for. The same has been happeningto government administrators at all levels, law enforcement, militaryand the human population. Cultists love mind control for two mainreasons: It allows them to control what people think, do and say tosecure agenda advancement and, by deÞnition, it calms theirlegendary insecurity and fear of the unexpected. I have studied mindcontrol since the time I travelled America in 1996. I may have beentalking to next to no one in terms of an audience in those years, butmy goodness did I gather a phenomenal amount of information andknowledge about so many things including the techniques of mindcontrol. I have described this in detail in other books going back toThe Biggest Secret in 1998. I met a very large number of peoplerecovering from MKUltra and its o.shoots and successors and Ibegan to see how these same techniques were being used on thepopulation in general. This was never more obvious than since theÔCovidÕ hoax began.
Reframing the enforcers 
I have observed over the last two decades and more the very cleartransformation in the dynamic between the police, o.cialdom andthe public. I tracked this in the books as the relationship mutatedfrom one of serving the public to seeing them as almost the enemyand certainly a lower caste. There has always been a class dividebased on income and always been some psychopathic, corrupt, andbig-I-am police o.cers. This was di.erent. Wholesale change wasunfolding in the collective dynamic; it was less about money and farmore about position and perceived power. An us-and-them wasemerging. Noses were liard by government administrationand law enforcement and their aeresupposed to be serving changed to one of increasing contempt,superiority and control. The transformation was so clear andwidespread that it had to be planned. Collective adynamics do not change naturally and organically that quickly onthat scale. I then came across an organisation in Britain calledCommon Purpose created in the late 1980s by Julia Middleton whowould work in the o.ce of Deputy Prime Minister John Prescoduring the long and disastrous premiership of war criminal TonyBlair. When Blair speaks the Cult is speaking and the man shouldhave been in jail a long time ago. Common Purpose proclaims itselfto be one of the biggest Ôleadership developmentÕ organisations inthe world while functioning as a charity with all the Þnancial beneÞtswhich come from that. It hosts Ôleadership developmentÕ courses andprogrammes all over the world and claims to have ÔbroughttogetherÕ what it calls ÔleadersÕ from more than 100 countries on sixcontinents. The modus operandi of Common Purpose can becompared with the work of the UK governmentÕs reframing networkthat includes the Behavioural Insights Team Ônudge unitÕ andÔCovidÕ reframing specialists at SPI-B. WikiLeaks describedCommon Purpose long ago as Ôa hidden virus in our governmentand schoolsÕ which is unknown to the general public: ÔIt recruits andtrains ÒleadersÓ to be loyal to the directives of Common Purpose andthe EU, instead of to their own departments, which they thenundermine or subvert, the NHS [National Health Service] being anexample.Õ This is a vital point to understand the ÔCovidÕ hoax. TheNHS, and its equivalent around the world, has been uin terms of administrators and much of the medical personnel withthe transformation underpinned by recruitment policies. Theoutcome has been the criminal and psychopathic behaviour of theNHS over ÔCovidÕ and we have seen the same in every other majorcountry. WikiLeaks said Common Purpose trainees are Ôlearning torule without regard to democracyÕ and to usher in a police state(current events explained). Common Purpose operated like a ÔglueÕand had members in the NHS, BBC, police, legal profession, church,many of BritainÕs 7,000 quangos, local councils, the Civil Service,government ministries and Parliament, and controlled many RDAÕs(Regional Development Agencies). Here we have one answer forhow and why British institutions and their like in other countrieshave changed so negatively in relation to the public. This furtherexplains how and why the beyond-disgraceful reframed BBC hasbecome a propaganda arm of ÔCovidÕ fascism. They are all part of anetwork pursuing the same goal.
By 2019 Common Purpose was quoting a Þgure of 85,000 ÔleadersÕthat had aknown as Common Purpose ÔgraduatesÕ and they consist ofgovernment, state and local government o.cials and administrators,police chiefs and o.cers, and a whole range of others operatingwithin the national, local and global establishment. Cressida Dick,Commissioner of the London Metropolitan Police, is the CommonPurpose graduate who was the ÔGold CommanderÕ that oversawwhat can only be described as the murder of Brazilian electricianJean Charles de Menezes in 2005. He was held down bypsychopathic police and shot seven times in the head by apsychopathic lunatic awas just a bloke going about his day. Dick authorised o.cers topursue and keep surveillance on de Menezes and ordered that he bestopped from entering the underground train system. Policepsychopaths took her at her word clearly. She was ÔdisciplinedÕ forthis outrage by being promoted Ð eventually to the top of the ÔMetÕpolice where she has been a disaster. Many Chief Constablescontrolling the police in di.erent parts of the UK are and have beenCommon Purpose graduates. I have heard the ÔgraduateÕ networkdescribed as a sort of MaÞa or secret society operating within thefabric of government at all levels pursuing a collective policyingrained at Common Purpose training events. Founder JuliaMiddleton herself has said:
Locally and internationally, Common Purpose graduates will be Ôlighting small firesÕ to create change in their organisations and communities É The Common Purpose effect is best illustrated by the many stories of small changes brought about by leaders, who themselves have changed. 
A Common Purpose mission statement declared:
Common Purpose aims to improve the way society works by expanding the vision, decision-making ability and influence of all kinds of leaders. The organisation runs a variety of educational programmes for leaders of all ages, backgrounds and sectors, in order to provide them with the inspirational, information and opportunities they need to change the world. 
Yes, but into what? Since 2020 the answer has become clear.
NLP and the Delphi technique 
Common Purpose would seem to be a perfect name or wouldcommon programming be bereaching ÔconsensusÕ (group think) is by seand then encouraging, cajoling or pressuring everyone to agree aÔconsensusÕ in line with the core theme promoted by CommonPurpose. The methodology involves the ÔDelphi techniqueÕ, or anadaption of it, in which opinions are expressed that are summarisedby a Ôfacilitator or change agentÕ at each stage. Participants areÔencouragedÕ to modify their views in the light of what others havesaid. Stage by stage the former individual opinions are merged intogroup consensus which just happens to be what Common Purposewants them to believe. A key part of this is to marginalise anyonerefusing to concede to group think and turn the group against themto apply pressure to conform. We are seeing this very technique usedon the general population to make ÔCovidÕ group-thinkers hostile tothose who have seen through the bullshit. People can be reframed byusing perception manipulation methods such as Neuro-LinguisticProgramming (NLP) in which you change perception with the use ofcarefully constructed language. An NLP website described thetechnique this way:
É A method of influencing brain behaviour (the ÔneuroÕ part of the phrase) through the use of language (the ÔlinguisticÕ part) and other types of communication to enable a person to ÔrecodeÕ the way the brain responds to stimuli (thatÕs the ÔprogrammingÕ) and manifest new and better behaviours. Neuro-Linguistic Programming often incorporates hypnosis and self-hypnosis to help achieve the change (or ÔprogrammingÕ) that is wanted. 
British alternative media operation UKColumn has done verydetailed research into Common Purpose over a long period. I quotedco-founder and former naval o.cer Brian Gerrish in my bookRemember Who You Are, published in 2011, as saying the followingyears before current times:
It is interesting that many of the mothers who have had children taken by the State speak of the Social Services people being icily cool, emotionless and, as two ladies said in slightly different words, ÔÉ like little robotsÕ. We know that NLP is cumulative, so people can be given small imperceptible doses of NLP in a course here, another in a few months, next year etc. In this way, major changes are accrued in their personality, but the day by day change is almost unnoticeable. 
In these and other ways ÔgraduatesÕ have had their perceptionsuniformly reframed and they return to their roles in the institutionsof government, law enforcement, legal profession, military,ÔeducationÕ, the UK National Health Service and the whole swathe ofthe establishment structure to pursue a common agenda preparingfor the Ôpost-industrialÕ, Ôpost-democraticÕ society. I say ÔpreparingÕbut we are now there. ÔPost-industrialÕ is code for the Great Resetand Ôpost-democraticÕ is ÔCovidÕ fascism. UKColumn has spoken topartners of those who have aThey have described how personalities and achanged very noticeably for the worse by the time they hadcompleted the course. They had been ÔreframedÕ and told they arethe ÔleadersÕ Ð the special ones Ð who know bepopulation. There has also been the very demonstrable recruitmentof psychopaths and narcissists into government administration at alllevels and law enforcement. If you want psychopathy hirepsychopaths and you get a simple cause and e.ect. If you wantadministrators, police o.cers and ÔleadersÕ to perceive the public aslesser beings who donÕt mapersonalities are identiÞed using ÔpsychometricsÕ that identiÞesknowledge, abilities, acarefully-designed questionnaires and tests. As this policy haspassed through the decades we have had power-crazy, power-trippers appointed into law enforcement, security and governmentadministration in preparation for current times and the dynamicbetween public and law enforcement/o.cialdom has beentransformed. UKColumnÕs Brian Gerrish said of the narcissisticpersonality:
Their love of themselves and power automatically means that they will crush others who get in their way. I received a major piece of the puzzle when a friend pointed out that when they made public officials re-apply for their own jobs several years ago they were also required to do psychometric tests. This was undoubtedly the start of the screening process to get ÔtheirÕ sort of people in post. 
How obvious that has been since 2020 although it was clear whatwas happening long before if people paid apublic-establishment dynamic.
Change agents 
At the centre of events in ÔCovidÕ Britain is the National HealthService (NHS) which has behaved disgracefully in slavishlyfollowing the Cult agenda. The NHS management structure is awashwith Common Purpose graduates or Ôchange agentsÕ working to acommon cause. Helen Bevan, a Chief of Service Transformation atthe NHS Institute for Innovation and Improvement, co-authored adocument called ÔTowards a million change agents, a review of thesocial movements literature: implications for large scale change inthe NHSÔ. The document compared a project management approachto that of change and social movements where Ôpeople changethemselves and each other Ð peer to peerÕ. Two deÞnitions given fora Ôsocial movementÕ were:
A group of people who consciously attempt to build a radically new social order; involves people of a broad range of social backgrounds; and deploys politically confrontational and socially disruptive tactics Ð CyrusZirakzadeh 1997
Collective challenges, based on common purposes and social solidarities, in sustained interaction with elites, opponents, and authorities Ð SidneyTarrow 1994
Helen Bevan wrote another NHS document in which she deÞnedÔframingÕ as Ôthe process by which leaders construct, articulate andput across their message in a powerful and compelling way in orderto win people to their cause and call them to actionÕ. I think I couldcome up with another deÞnition that would be rather more accurate.The National Health Service and institutions of Britain and the widerworld have been taken over by reframed Ôchange agentsÕ and thatincludes everything from the United Nations to nationalgovernments, local councils and social services which have beenkidnapping children from loving parents on an extraordinary andgathering scale on the road to the end of parenthood altogether.Children from loving homes are stolen and kidnapped by the stateand put into the ÔcareÕ (inversion) of the local authority throughcouncil homes, foster parents and forced adoption. At the same timechildren are allowed to be abused without response while many areunder council ÔcareÕ. UKColumn highlighted the Common Purposeconnection between South Yorkshire Police and Rotherham councilo.cers in the case of the scandal in that area of the sexualexploitation of children to which the authorities turned not one blindeye, but both:
We were alarmed to discover that the Chief Executive, the Strategic Director of Children and Young PeopleÕs Services, the Manager for the Local Strategic Partnership, the Community Cohesion Manager, the Cabinet Member for Cohesion, the Chief Constable and his predecessor had all attended Leadership training courses provided by the pseudo-charity Common Purpose. 
Once Ôchange agentsÕ have secured positions of hire and Þre withinany organisation things start to move very quickly. Personnel arethen hired and Þred on the basis of whether they will work towardsthe agenda the change agent represents. If they do they are rapidlypromoted even though they may be incompetent. Those morequaliÞed and skilled who are pre-Common Purpose Ôold schoolÕ seetheir careers stall and even disappear. This has been happening fordecades in every institution of state, police, ÔhealthÕ and socialservices and all of them have been transformed as a result in theiranursing, which were once vocations for the caring now employmany cold, callous and couldnÕt give a shit personality types. TheUKColumn investigation concluded:
By blurring the boundaries between people, professions, public and private sectors, responsibility and accountability, Common Purpose encourages ÔgraduatesÕ to believe that as new selected leaders, they can work together, outside of the established political and social structures, to achieve a paradigm shift or CHANGE Ð so called ÔLeading Beyond AuthorityÕ. In doing so, the allegiance of the individual becomes ÔreframedÕ on CP colleagues and their NETWORK. 
Reframing the Face-Nappies 
Nowhere has this process been more obvious than in the policewhere recruitment of psychopaths and development ofunquestioning mind-controlled group-thinkers have transformedlaw enforcement into a politically-correct ÔWokeÕ joke and a travestyof what should be public service. Today they wear their face-nappieslike good liunder another name. Alongside the speciÞcally-recruitedpsychopaths we have soare minds incapable of free thought.Brian Gerrish again:
An example is the policeman who would not get on a bike for a press photo because he had not done the cycling proficiency course. Normal people say this is political correctness gone mad. Nothing could be further from the truth. The policeman has been reframed, and in his reality it is perfect common sense not to get on the bike Ôbecause he hasnÕt done the cycling courseÕ. 
Another example of this is where the police would not rescue a boy from a pond until they had taken advice from above on the Ôrisk assessmentÕ. A normal person would have arrived, perhaps thought of the risk for a moment, and dived in. To the police now ÔreframedÕ, they followed ÔnormalÕ procedure. 
There are shocking cases of reframed ambulance crews doing thesame. Sheer unthinking stupidity of London Face-Nappies headedby Common Purpose graduate Cressida Dick can be seen in theirbehaviour at a vigil in March, 2021, for a murdered woman, SarahEverard. A police o.cer had been charged with the crime. Anyonewith a brain would have leInstead they ÔmanhandledÕ women to stop them breaking ÔCovidrulesÕ to betray classic reframing. Minds in the thrall of perceptioncontrol have no capacity for seeing a situation on its merits andacting accordingly. ÔRules is rulesÕ is their only mind-set. My fatherused to say that rules and regulations are for the guidance of theintelligent and the blind obedience of the idiot. Most of theintelligent, decent, coppers have gone leaving only the other kindand a few old school for whom the job must be a daily nightmare.The combination of psychopaths and rule-book soare minds hasbeen clearly on public display in the ÔCovidÕ era with automatonrobots in uniform imposing fascistic ÔCovidÕ regulations on thepopulation without any personal initiative or judging situations ontheir merits. There are thousands of examples around the world, butIÕll make my point with the infamous Derbyshire police in theEnglish East Midlands Ð the ones who think pouring dye into beautyspots and using drones to track people walking in the countrysideaway from anyone is called ÔpolicingÕ. To them there are rulesdecreed by the government which they have to enforce and in theirbewildered state a group gathering in a closed space and someonewalking alone in the countryside are the same thing. It is beyondidiocy and enters the realm of clinical insanity.
Police o.cers in Derbyshire said they were ÔhorriÞedÕ Ð horrified Ðto Þnd 15 to 20 ÔirresponsibleÕ kids playing a football match at aclosed leisure centre Ôin breach of coronavirus restrictionsÕ. Whenthey saw the police the kids ran away leaving their belongingsbehind and the reframed men and women of Derbyshire police wereseeking to establish their identities with a view to Þning theirparents. The most natural thing for youngsters to do Ð kicking a ballabout Ð is turned into a criminal activity and enforced by themoronic soare programs of Derbyshire police. You Þnd the samementality in every country. These barely conscious ÔhorriÞedÕ o.cerssaid they had to take action because Ôwe need to ensure these rulesare being followedÕ and Ôit is of the utmost importance that youensure your children are following the rules and regulations forCovid-19Õ. Had any of them done ten seconds of research to see ifthis parroting of their mastersÕ script could be supported by anyevidence? Nope. Reframed people donÕt think Ð others think forthem and thatÕs the whole idea of reframing. I have seen policeo.cers one aord forword what o.cialdom tells them just as I have seen great swathes ofthe public doing the same. Ask either for ÔtheirÕ opinion and outspews what they have been told to think by the o.cial narrative.Police and public may seem to be in di.erent groups, but theirmentality is the same. Most people do whatever they are told in fearnot doing so or because they believe what o.cialdom tells them;almost the entirety of the police do what they are told for the samereason. Ultimately itÕs the tiny inner core of the global Cult thatÕstelling both what to do.
So Derbyshire police were ÔhorriÞedÕ. Oh, really? Why did theythink those kids were playing football? It was to relieve thepsychological consequences of lockdown and being denied humancontact with their friends and interaction, touch and discourse vitalto human psychological health. Being denied this month ahas dismantled the psyche of many children and young people asdepression and suicide have exploded. Were Derbyshire policehorrified by that? Are you kidding? Reframed people donÕt have thosemental and emotional processes that can see how the impact on thepsychological health of youngsters is far more dangerous than anyÔvirusÕ even if you take the mendacious o.cial Þgures to be true. Thereframed are told (programmed) how to act and so they do. TheDerbyshire Chief Constable in the Þrst period of lockdown when theblack dye and drones nonsense was going on was Peter Goodman.He was the man who severed the connection between his force andthe Derbyshire Constabulary Male Voice Choir when he decided thatit was not inclusive enough to allow women to join. The fact it was amale voice choir making a particular sound produced by male voicesseemed to elude a guy who terrifyingly ran policing in Derbyshire.He retired weeks aas condemned as disgraceful byformer Supreme Court Justice Jonathan Sumption for theirbehaviour over extreme lockdown impositions. Goodman wasreplaced by his deputy Rachel Swann who was in charge when hero.cers were ÔhorriÞedÕ. The police statement over the boyscommiabout the youngsters being Ôirresponsible in the times we are allliving throughÕ missing the point that the real relevance of the Ôtimeswe are all living throughÕ is the imposition of fascism enforced bypsychopaths and reframed minds of police o.cers playing such avital part in establishing the fascist tyranny that their own childrenand grandchildren will have to live in their entire lives. As adeÞnition of insanity that is hard to beat although it might be runclose by imposing masks on people that can have a serious e.ect ontheir health while wearing a face nappy all day themselves. Onceagain public and police do it for the same reason Ð the authorities tellthem to and who are they to have the self-respect to say no?
Wokers in uniform 
How reframed do you have to be to arrest a six-year-old and take himto court for picking a flower while waiting for a bus? Brain dead policeand o.cialdom did just that in North Carolina where criminalproceedings happen regularly for children under nine. AJulie Boyer gave the six-year-old crayons and a colouring bookduring the ÔßowerÕ hearing while the ÔadultsÕ decided his fate.County Chief District Court Judge Jay Corpening asked: ÔShould achild that believes in Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and the toothfairy be making life-altering decisions?Õ Well, of course not, butcommon sense has no meaning when you have a common purposeand a reframed mind. Treating children in this way, and policeoperating in American schools, is all part of the psychologicalpreparation for children to accept a police state as normal all theiradult lives. The same goes for all the cameras and biometric trackingtechnology in schools. Police training is focused on reframing themas snowßake Wokers and this is happening in the military. Pentagontop brass said that Ôtraining sessions on extremismÕ were needed fortroops who asked why they were so focused on the Capitol Buildingriot when Black Lives Maere ignored. WhatÕs thedi.erence between them some apparently and rightly asked.Actually, there is a di.erence. Five people died in the Capitol riot,only one through violence, and that was a police o.cer shooting anunarmed protestor. BLM riots killed at least 25 people and costbillions. Asking the question prompted the psychopaths andreframed minds that run the Pentagon to say that more ÔeducationÕ(programming) was needed. Troop training is all based onpsychological programming to make them fodder for the Cult ÐÔMilitary men are just dumb, stupid animals to be used as pawns inforeign policyÕ as Cult-to-his-DNA former Secretary of State HenryKissinger famously said. Governments see the police in similar termsand itÕs time for those among them who can see this to defend thepeople and stop being enforcers of the Cult agenda upon the people.
The US military, like the country itself, is being targeted fordestruction through a long list of Woke impositions. Cult-ownedgaga ÔPresidentÕ Biden signed an executive order when he took o.ceto allow taxpayer money to pay for transgender surgery for activemilitary personnel and veterans. Are you a man soldier? No, IÕm aLGBTQIA+ with a hint of Skoliosexual and Spectrasexual. Oh, goodman. Bad choice of words you bigot. The Pentagon announced inMarch, 2021, the appointment of the Þrst Ôdiversity and inclusiono.cerÕ for US Special Forces. Richard Torres-Estrada arrived withthe publication of a ÔD&I Strategic Plan which will guide theenterprise-wide e.ort to institutionalize and sustain D&IÕ. If youthink a Special Forces ÔStrategic PlanÕ should have something to dowith defending America you havenÕt been paying aDefending Woke is now the militaryÕs new role. Torres-Estrada hasposted images comparing Donald Trump with Adolf Hitler and wecan expect no bias from him as a representative of the supposedlynon-political Pentagon. Cable news host Tucker Carlson said: ÔThePentagon is now the Yale faculty lounge but with cruise missiles.ÕMeanwhile Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, a board member ofweapons-maker Raytheon with stock and compensation interests inOctober, 2020, worth $1.4 million, said he was purging the militaryof the Ôenemy withinÕ Ð anyone who isnÕt Woke and supports DonaldTrump. Austin refers to his targets as Ôracist extremistsÕ while in trueWoke fashion being himself a racist extremist. Pentagon documentspledge to Ôeradicate, eliminate and conquer all forms of racism,sexism and homophobiaÕ. The deÞnitions of these are decided byÔdiversity and inclusion commiracism, sexism and homophobia in every situation and opinion.Woke (the Cult) is dismantling the US military and purgingtestosterone as China expands its military and gives its troopsÔmasculinity trainingÕ. How do we think that is going to end whenthis is all Cult coordinated? The US military, like the British military,is controlled by Woke and spineless top brass who just go along withit out of personal career interests.
ÔWokeÕ means fast asleep 
Mind control and perception manipulation techniques used onindividuals to create group-think have been unleashed on the globalpopulation in general. As a result many have no capacity to see theobvious fascist agenda being installed all around them or whatÔCovidÕ is really all about. Their brains are Þrewalled like a computersystem not to process certain concepts, thoughts and realisations thatare bad for the Cult. The young are most targeted as the adults theywill be when the whole fascist global state is planned to be fullyimplemented. They need to be prepared for total compliance toeliminate all pushback from entire generations. The Cult has beenpouring billions into taking complete control of ÔeducationÕ fromschools to universities via its operatives and corporations and notleast Bill Gates as always. The plan has been to transform ÔeducationÕinstitutions into programming centres for the mentality of ÔWokeÕ.James McConnell, professor of psychology at the University ofMichigan, wrote in Psychology Today in 1970:
The day has come when we can combine sensory deprivation with drugs, hypnosis, and astute manipulation of reward and punishment, to gain almost absolute control over an individualÕs behaviour. It should then be possible to achieve a very rapid and highly effective type of brainwashing that would allow us to make dramatic changes in a personÕs behaviour and personality ... 
É We should reshape society so that we all would be trained from birth to want to do what society wants us to do. We have the techniques to do it... no-one owns his own personality you acquired, and thereÕs no reason to believe you should have the right to refuse to acquire a new personality if your old one is anti-social. 
This was the potential for mass brainwashing in 1970 and thementality there displayed captures the arrogant psychopathy thatdrives it forward. I emphasise that not all young people havesuccumbed to Woke programming and those that havenÕt areincredibly impressive people given that todayÕs young are the mostperceptually-targeted generations in history with all the technologynow involved. Vast swathes of the young generations, however, havefallen into the spell Ð and thatÕs what it is Ð of Woke. The Wokementality and perceptual program is founded on inversion and youwill appreciate later why that is so signiÞcant. Everything with Wokeis inverted and the opposite of what it is claimed to be. Woke was aterm used in African-American culture from the 1900s and referredto an awareness of social and racial justice. This is not the meaningof the modern version or ÔNew WokeÕ as I call it in The Answer. Oh,no, Woke today means something very di.erent no mamuch Wokers may seek to hide that and insist Old Woke and NewWoke are the same. See if you Þnd any Ôawareness of social justiceÕhere in the modern variety:
¥
Woke demands ÔinclusivityÕ while excluding anyone with adi.erent opinion and calls for mass censorship to silence otherviews.

¥
Woke claims to stand against oppression when imposingoppression is the foundation of all that it does. It is the driver ofpolitical correctness which is nothing more than a Cult inventionto manipulate the population to silence itself.

¥
Woke believes itself to be ÔliberalÕ while pursuing a global societythat can only be described as fascist (see Ôanti-fascistÕ fascistAntifa).

¥
Woke calls for Ôsocial justiceÕ while spreading injustice wherever itgoes against the common ÔenemyÕ which can be easily identiÞedas a di.ering view.

¥
Woke is supposed to be a metaphor for ÔawakeÕ when it is solid-gold asleep and deep in a Cult-induced coma that meets thecriteria for Ôo. with the fairiesÕ.


I state these points as obvious facts if people only care to look. IdonÕt do this with a sense of condemnation. We need to appreciatethat the onslaught of perceptual programming on the young hasbeen incessant and merciless. I can understand why so many havebeen reframed, or, given their youth, framed from the start to see theworld as the Cult demands. The Cult has had access to their mindsday aeyears. Perception is formed from information received and the Cult-created system is a life-long download of information delivered toelicit a particular perception, thus behaviour. The more this hasexpanded into still new extremes in recent decades and ever-increasing censorship has deleted other opinions and informationwhy wouldnÕt that lead to a perceptual reframing on a mass scale? Ihave described already cradle-to-grave programming and in morerecent times the targeting of young minds from birth to adulthoodhas entered the stratosphere. This has taken the form of skewingwhat is ÔtaughtÕ to Þt the Cult agenda and the omnipresenttechniques of group-think to isolate non-believers and pressure theminto line. There has always been a tendency to follow the herd, butwe really are in a new world now in relation to that. We have parentswho can see the ÔCovidÕ hoax told by their children not to stop themwearing masks at school, being ÔCovidÕ tested or having the ÔvaccineÕin fear of the peer-pressure consequences of being di.erent. What isÔpeer-pressureÕ if not pressure to conform to group-think? RenegadeMinds never group-think and always retain a set of perceptions thatare unique to them. Group-think is always underpinned byconsequences for not group-thinking. Abuse now aimed at thoserefusing DNA-manipulating ÔCovid vaccinesÕ are a potent exampleof this. The biggest pressure to conform comes from the very groupwhich is itself being manipulated. ÔI am programmed to be part of ahive mind and so you must be.Õ
Woke control structures in ÔeducationÕ now apply to everymainstream organisation. Those at the top of the ÔeducationÕhierarchy (the Cult) decide the policy. This is imposed ongovernments through the Cult network; governments impose it onschools, colleges and universities; their leadership impose the policyon teachers and academics and they impose it on children andstudents. At any level where there is resistance, perhaps from ateacher or university lecturer, they are targeted by the authoritiesand oes regularly demand the dismissalof academics (increasingly few) at odds with the narrative that thestudents have been programmed to believe in. It is quite a thoughtthat students who are being targeted by the Cult become soconsumed by programmed group-think that they launch protestsand demand the removal of those who are trying to push backagainst those targeting the students. Such is the scale of perceptualinversion. We see this with ÔCovidÕ programming as the Cultimposes the rules via psycho-psychologists and governments onshops, transport companies and businesses which impose them ontheir sta. who impose them on their customers who pressurePushbackers to conform to the will of the Cult which is in theprocess of destroying them and their families. Scan all aspects ofsociety and you will see the same sequence every time.
Fact free Woke and hijacking the ÔleftÕ 
There is no more potent example of this than ÔWokeÕ, a mentalityonly made possible by the deletion of factual evidence by anÔeducationÕ system seeking to produce an ever more uniform society.Why would you bother with facts when you donÕt know any?Deletion of credible history both in volume and type is highlyrelevant. Orwell said: ÔWho controls the past controls the future:who controls the present controls the past.Õ They who control theperception of the past control the perception of the future and theywho control the present control the perception of the past throughthe writing and deleting of history. Why would you oppose theimposition of Marxism in the name of Wokeism when you donÕtknow that Marxism cost at least 100 million lives in the 20th centuryalone? Watch videos and read reports in which Woker generationsare asked basic historical questions Ð itÕs mind-blowing. A survey of2,000 people found that six percent of millennials (bornapproximately early1980s to early 2000s) believed the Second WorldWar (1939-1945) broke out with the assassination of PresidentKennedy (in 1963) and one in ten thought Margaret Thatcher wasBritish Prime Minister at the time. She was in o.ce between 1979and 1990. We are in a post-fact society. Provable facts are no defenceagainst the fascism of political correctness or Silicon Valleycensorship. Facts donÕt mae have witnessed withthe ÔCovidÕ hoax. SacriÞcing uniqueness to the Woke group-thinkreligion is all you are required to do and that means thinking foryourself is the biggest Woke no, no. All religions are an expression ofgroup-think and censorship and Woke is just another religion withan orthodoxy defended by group-think and censorship. Burned atthe stake becomes burned on Twientually toburned at the stake as Woke humanity regresses to ages past.
The biggest Woke inversion of all is its creators and funders. Igrew up in a traditional lecouncil estate in Leicester in the 1950s and 60s Ð you know, the lethat challenged the power of wealth-hoarding elites and threats tofreedom of speech and opinion. In those days students went onmarches defending freedom of speech while todayÕs Wokers marchfor its deletion. What on earth could have happened? Those veryelites (collectively the Cult) that we opposed in my youth and earlylife have funded into existence the antithesis of that former leh.acked the ÔbrandÕ while inverting everything it ever stood for. Wehave a mentality that calls itself ÔliberalÕ and ÔprogressiveÕ whileacting like fascists. Cult billionaires and their corporations havefunded themselves into control of ÔeducationÕ to ensure that Wokeprogramming is unceasing throughout the formative years ofchildren and young people and that non-Wokers are isolated (thatword again) whether they be students, teachers or college professors.The Cult has funded into existence the now colossal global networkof Woke organisations that have spawned and promoted all theÔcausesÕ on the Cult wish-list for global transformation and turnedWokers into demanders of them. Does anyone really think itÕs acoincidence that the Cult agenda for humanity is a carbon (sorry)copy of the societal transformations desired by Woke?? These areonly some of them:
Political correctness: The means by which the Cult deletes all publicdebates that it knows it cannot win if we had the free-ßow ofinformation and evidence.
Human-caused Ôclimate changeÕ: The means by which the Cultseeks to transform society into a globally-controlled dictatorshipimposing its will over the Þne detail of everyoneÕs lives Ôto save theplanetÕ which doesnÕt actually need saving.
Transgender obsession: Preparing collective perception to accept theÔnew humanÕ which would not have genders because it would becreated technologically and not through procreation. IÕll have muchmore on this in Human 2.0.
Race obsession: The means by which the Cult seeks to divide andrule the population by triggering racial division through theperception that society is more racist than ever when the opposite isthe case. Is it perfect in that regard? No. But to compare today withthe racism of apartheid and segregation brought to an end by thecivil rights movement in the 1960s is to insult the memory of thatmovement and inspirations like Martin Luther King. Why is theÔanti-racismÕ industry (which it is) so dominated by privileged whitepeople?
White supremacy: This is a label used by privileged white people todemonise poor and deprived white people pushing back on tyrannyto marginalise and destroy them. White people are being especiallytargeted as the dominant race by number within Western societywhich the Cult seeks to transform in its image. If you want to changea society you must weaken and undermine its biggest group andonce you have done that by using the other groups you next turn onthem to do the same É ÔThen they came for the Jews and I was not aJew so I did nothing.Õ
Mass migration: The mass movement of people from the MiddleEast, Africa and Asia into Europe, from the south into the UnitedStates and from Asia into Australia are another way the Cult seeks todilute the racial, cultural and political inßuence of white people onWestern society. White people ask why their governments appear tobe working against them while being politically and culturallybiased towards incoming cultures. Well, hereÕs your answer. In thesame way sexually ÔstraightÕ people, men and women, ask why theauthorities are biased against them in favour of other sexualities. Theanswer is the same Ð thatÕs the way the Cult wants it to be for verysinister motives.
These are all central parts of the Cult agenda and central parts of theWoke agenda and Woke was created and continues to be funded toan immense degree by Cult billionaires and corporations. If anyonebegins to say ÔcoincidenceÕ the syllables should stick in their throat.
Billionaire Ôsocial justice warriorsÕ 
Joe Biden is a 100 percent-owned asset of the Cult and the WokersÕman in the White House whenever he can remember his name andfor however long he lasts with his rapidly diminishing cognitivefunction. Even walking up the steps of an aircrahis arse would appear to be a challenge. HeÕs not an empty-shellpuppet or anything. From the minute Biden took o.ce (or the Cultdid) he began his executive orders promoting the Woke wish-list.You will see the Woke agenda imposed ever more severely becauseitÕs really the Cult agenda. Woke organisations and activist networksspawned by the Cult are funded to the extreme so long as theypromote what the Cult wants to happen. Woke is funded to promoteÔsocial justiceÕ by billionaires who become billionaires by destroyingsocial justice. The social justice mantra is only a cover fordismantling social justice and funded by billionaires that couldnÕtgive a damn about social justice. Everything makes sense when yousee that. One of WokeÕs premier funders is Cult billionaire ÞnancierGeorge Soros who said: ÔI am basically there to make money, Icannot and do not look at the social consequences of what I do.Õ Thisis the same Soros who has given more than $32 billion to his OpenSociety Foundations global Woke network and funded Black LivesMa, mass immigration into Europe and the United States,transgender activism, climate change activism, political correctnessand groups targeting Ôwhite supremacyÕ in the form of privilegedwhite thugs that dominate Antifa. What a scam it all is and whenyou are dealing with the unquestioning fact-free zone of Wokescamming them is childÕs play. All you need to pull it o. in all theseorganisations are a few in-the-know agents of the Cult and an armyof na•ve, reframed, uninformed, narcissistic, know-nothingsconvinced of their own self-righteousness, self-purity and virtue.
Soros and fellow billionaires and billionaire corporations havepoured hundreds of millions into Black Lives Magroups and promoted them to a global audience. None of this ismotivated by caring about black people. These are the billionairesthat have controlled and exploited a system that leaves millions ofblack people in abject poverty and deprivation which they doabsolutely nothing to address. The same Cult networks fundingBLM were behind the slave trade! Black Lives Maphrase that few would challenge and they have turned this laudableconcept into a political weapon to divide society. You know thatBLM is a fraud when it claims that All Lives Ma, the mostinclusive statement of all, is ÔracistÕ. BLM and its Cult masters donÕtwant to end racism. To them itÕs a means to an end to control all ofhumanity never mind the colour, creed, culture or background.What has destroying the nuclear family got to do with endingracism? Nothing Ð but that is one of the goals of BLM and alsohappens to be a goal of the Cult as I have been exposing in my booksfor decades. Stealing children from loving parents and givingschools ever more power to override parents is part of that sameagenda. BLM is a Marxist organisation and why would that not bethe case when the Cult created Marxism and BLM? Patrisse Cullors, aBLM co-founder, said in a 2015 video that she and her felloworganisers, including co-founder Alicia Garza, are Ôtrained MarxistsÕ.The lady known aatrisse Khan-Cullors bought a$1.4 million home in 2021 in one of the whitest areas of Californiawith a black population of just 1.6 per cent and has so far bought four high-end homes for a total of $3.2 million. How very Marxist. Theremust be a bit of spare in the BLM co.ers, however, when Cultcorporations and billionaires have handed over the best part of $100million. Many black people can see that Black Lives Maworking for them, but against them, and this is still moreconÞrmation. Black journalist Jason Whitlock, who had his accountsuspended by TwiÔMarxistÕsÕ home buying spree, said that BLM leaders are Ômakingmillions of dollars o. the backs of these dead black men who theywouldnÕt spit on if they were on Þre and aliveÕ.
Black Lies Matter 
Cult assets and agencies came together to promote BLM in the wakeof the death of career criminal George Floyd who had been jailed anumber of times including for forcing his way into the home of ablack woman with others in a raid in which a gun was pointed at herstomach. Floyd was Þlmed being held in a Minneapolis street in 2020with the knee of a police o.cer on his neck and he subsequentlydied. It was an appalling thing for the o.cer to do, but the sametechnique has been used by police on peaceful protestors oflockdown without any outcry from the Woke brigade. Asunquestioning supporters of the Cult agenda Wokers havesupported lockdown and all the ÔCovidÕ claptrap while aanyone standing up to the tyranny imposed in its name. Courtdocuments would later include details of an autopsy on Floyd byCounty Medical Examiner Dr Andrew Baker who concluded thatFloyd had taken a fatal level of the drug fentanyl. None of thismaoke. FloydÕs death wasfollowed by worldwide protests against police brutality amid calls todefund the police. Throwing babies out with the bathwater is aWoke speciality. In the wake of the murder of British woman SarahEverard a Green Party member of the House of Lords, BaronessJones of Moulescoomb (Nincompoopia would have been becalled for a 6pm curfew for all men. This would be in breach of theGeneva Conventions on war crimes which ban collectivepunishment, but that would never have crossed the black and whiteWoke mind of Baroness Nincompoopia who would have been fartoo convinced of her own self-righteousness to compute such details.Many American cities did defund the police in the face of Floyd riotsand aas deleted from the police budget inWashington DC under useless Woke mayor Muriel Bowser car.jacking alone rose by 300 percent and within six months the UScapital recorded its highest murder rate in 15 years. The samehappened in Chicago and other cities in line with the Cult/Sorosplan to bring fear to streets and neighbourhoods by reducing thepolice, releasing violent criminals and not prosecuting crime. This isthe mob-rule agenda that I have warned in the books was coming forso long. Shootings in the area of Minneapolis where Floyd wasarrested increased by 2,500 percent compared with the year before.Defunding the police over George Floyd has led to a big increase indead people with many of them black. Police protection forpoliticians making these decisions stayed the same or increased asyou would expect from professional hypocrites. The Cult doesnÕtactually want to abolish the police. It wants to abolish local controlover the police and hand it to federal government as thepsychopaths advance the Hunger Games Society. Many GeorgeFloyd protests turned into violent riots with black stores andbusinesses destroyed by Þre and looting across America fuelled byBlack Lives Ma. Woke doesnÕt do irony. If you want civil rightsyou must loot the liquor store and the supermarket and make o.with a smart TV. ItÕs the only way.
ItÕs not a race war Ð itÕs a class war 
Black people are patronised by privileged blacks and whites alikeand told they are victims of white supremacy. I Þnd it extraordinaryto watch privileged blacks supporting the very system and bloodlinenetworks behind the slave trade and parroting the same Cult-servingmanipulative crap of their privileged white, oassociates. It is indeed not a race war but a class war and colour isjust a diversion. Black Senator Cory Booker and blackCongresswoman Maxine Waters, more residents of Nincompoopia,personify this. Once you tell people they are victims of someone elseyou devalue both their own responsibility for their plight and thepower they have to impact on their reality and experience. Insteadwe have: ÔYou are only in your situation because of whitey Ð turn onthem and everything will change.Õ It wonÕt change. Nothing changesin our lives unless we change it. Crucial to that is never seeingyourself as a victim and always as the creator of your reality. Life is asimple sequence of choice and consequence. Make di.erent choicesand you create di.erent consequences. You have to make thosechoices Ð not Black Lives Ma, the Woke MaÞa and anyone elsethat seeks to dictate your life. Who are they these Wokers, anemotional and psychological road tra.c accident, to tell you what todo? Personal empowerment is the last thing the Cult and its BlackLives Maant black people or anyone else to have. They claim tobe defending the underdog while creating and perpetuating theunderdog. The CultÕs worst nightmare is human unity and if theyare going to keep blacks, whites and every other race undereconomic servitude and control then the focus must be divertedfrom what they have in common to what they can be manipulated tobelieve divides them. Blacks have to be told that their poverty andplight is the fault of the white bloke living on the street in the samepoverty and with the same plight they are experiencing. Thedi.erence is that your plight black people is due to him, a whitesupremacist with Ôwhite privilegeÕ living on the street. DonÕt unite asone human family against your mutual oppressors and suppressors
Ð Þght the oppressor with the white face who is as Þnanciallydeprived as you are. The Cult knows that as its ÔCovidÕ agendamoves into still new levels of extremism people are going to respondand it has been spreading the seeds of disunity everywhere to stop aunited response to the evil that targets all of us.
Racist aer more outrageous andespecially through the American Democratic Party which has anappalling history for anti-black racism. Barack Obama, Joe Biden,Hillary Clinton and Nancy Pelosi all eulogised about Senator RobertByrd at his funeral in 2010 aear career in Congress.Byrd was a brutal Ku Klux Klan racist and a violent abuser of CathyOÕBrien in MKUltra. He said he would never Þght in the militaryÔwith a negro by my sideÕ and Ôrather I should die a thousand times,and see Old Glory trampled in the dirt never to rise again, than tosee this beloved land of ours become degraded by race mongrels, athrowback to the blackest specimen from the wildsÕ. Biden calledByrd a Ôvery close friend and mentorÕ. These ÔWokeÕ hypocrites arenot anti-racist they are anti-poor and anti-people not of theirperceived class. Here is an illustration of the scale of anti-whiteracism to which we have now descended. Seriously Woke andmoronic New York Times contributor Damon Young describedwhiteness as a ÔvirusÕ that Ôlike other viruses will not die until thereare no bodies leent on: ÔÉ the only way tostop it is to locate it, isolate it, extract it, and kill it.Õ Young can saythat as a black man with no consequences when a white man sayingthe same in reverse would be facing a jail sentence. ThatÕs racism. Wehad super-Woke numbskull senators Tammy Duckworth and MazieHirono saying they would object to future Biden Cabinetappointments if he did not nominate more Asian Americans andPaciÞc Islanders. Never mind the ability of the candidate what dothey look like? Duckworth said: ÔI will vote for racial minorities and Iwill vote for LGBTQ, but anyone else IÕm not voting for.Õ Appointingpeople on the grounds of race is illegal, but that was not a problemfor this ludicrous pair. They were on-message and thatÕs a free passin any situation.
Critical race racism 
White children are told at school they are intrinsically racist as theyare taught the divisive Ôcritical race theoryÕ. This claims that the lawand legal institutions are inherently racist and that race is a sociallyconstructed concept used by white people to further their economicand political interests at the expense of people of colour. White is aÔvirusÕ as weÕve seen. Racial inequality results from Ôsocial,economic, and legal di.erences that white people create betweenraces to maintain white interests which leads to poverty andcriminality in minority communitiesÔ. I must tell that to the whiteguy sleeping on the street. The principal of East Side CommunitySchool in New York sent white parents a manifesto that called onthem to become Ôwhite traitorsÕ and advocate for full ÔwhiteabolitionÕ. These people are teaching your kids when they urgentlyneed a psychiatrist. The ÔschoolÕ included a chart with Ôeight whiteidentitiesÕ that ranged from Ôwhite supremacistÕ to Ôwhite abolitionÕand deÞned the behaviour white people must follow to end Ôtheregime of whitenessÕ. Woke blacks and their privileged whiteassociates are acting exactly like the slave owners of old and Ku KluxKlan racists like Robert Byrd. They are too full of their own self-purity to see that, but itÕs true. Racism is not a body type; itÕs a stateof mind that can manifest through any colour, creed or culture.
Another racial fraud is ÔequityÕ. Not equality of treatment andopportunity Ð equity. ItÕs a term spun as equality when it meanssomething very di.erent. Equality in its true sense is a raising upwhile ÔequityÕ is a race to the boeryone in the same level ofpoverty is ÔequityÕ. Keep everyone down Ð thatÕs equity. The CultdoesnÕt want anyone in the human family to be empowered andBLM leaders, like all these Ôanti-racistÕ organisations, continue theirprivileged, pampered existence by perpetuating the perception ofgathering racism. When is the last time you heard an Ôanti-racistÕ orÔanti-SemitismÕ organisation say that acts of racism anddiscrimination have fallen? ItÕs not in the interests of their fund.raising and power to inßuence and the same goes for theprofessional soccer anti-racism operation, Kick It Out. Two thingsconÞrmed that the Black Lives Mawere Cult creations. One was that while anti-lockdown protests werecondemned in this same period for Ôtransmiauthorities supported mass gatherings of Black Lives Masupporters. I even saw self-deluding people claiming to be doctorssay the two types of protest were not the same. No Ð the non-existentÔCovidÕ was in favour of lockdowns and aprotested against them while ÔCovidÕ supported Black Lives Maand kept well away from its protests. The whole thing was a jokeand as lockdown protestors were arrested, o, byreframed Face-Nappies we had the grotesque sight of police o.cerstaking the knee to Black Lives Ma, a Cult-funded Marxistorganisation that supports violent riots and wants to destroy thenuclear family and white people.
HeÕs not white? Shucks! 
Woke obsession with race was on display again when ten peoplewere shot dead in Boulder, Colorado, in March, 2021. Cult-ownedWoke TV channels like CNN said the shooter appeared to be a whiteman and Wokers were on Twiwith the usual mantras. Then the shooterÕs name was released asAhmad Al Aliwi Alissa, an anti-Trump Arab-American, and the sighof disappointment could be heard Þve miles away. Never mind thatten people were dead and what that meant for their families. Racebaiting was all that maBarack Obama who exploited the deaths to further divide Americaon racial grounds which is his job for the Cult. This is the man thatÔracistÕ white Americans made the Þrst black president of the UnitedStates and then gave him a second term. Not-very-bright Obama hasbecome Þlthy rich on the back of that and today appears to have abig inßuence on the Biden administration. Even so heÕs still adowntrodden black man and a victim of white supremacy. Thisdisingenuous fraud reveals the contempt he has for black peoplewhen he puts on a Deep South Alabama accent whenever he talks tothem, no, at them.
Another BLM red ßag was how the now fully-Woke (fully-Cult)and fully-virtue-signalled professional soccer authorities had theirteams taking the knee before every match in support of MarxistBlack Lives Ma. Soccer authorities and clubs displayed ÔBlackLives MaÕ on the playersÕ shirts and ßashed the name onelectronic billboards around the pitch. Any fans that condemnedwhat is a Freemasonic taking-the-knee ritual were widelycondemned as you would expect from the Woke virtue-signallers ofprofessional sport and the now fully-Woke media. We have reverseracism in which you are banned from criticising any race or cultureexcept for white people for whom anything goes Ð say what you like,no problem. What has this got to do with racial harmony andequality? WeÕve had black supremacists from Black Lives Matelling white people to fall to their knees in the street and apologisefor their white supremacy. Black supremacists acting like whitesupremacist slave owners of the past couldnÕt breach their self-obsessed, race-obsessed sense of self-purity. Joe Biden appointed arace-obsessed black supremacist Kristen Clarke to head the JusticeDepartment Civil Rights Division. Clarke claimed that blacks areendowed with Ôgreater mental, physical and spiritual abilitiesÕ thanwhites. If anyone reversed that statement they would be viliÞed.Clarke is on-message so no problem. SheÕs never seen a black-whitesituation in which the black Þgure is anything but a virtuous victimand she heads the Civil Rights Division which should treat everyonethe same or it isnÕt civil rights. Another perception of the RenegadeMind: If something or someone is part of the Cult agenda they willbe supported by Woke governments and media no matheyÕre not, they will be condemned and censored. It really is thatsimple and so racist Clarke prospers despite (make that because of)her racism.
The end of culture 
BidenÕs administration is full of such racial, cultural and economicbias as the Cult requires the human family to be divided intowarring factions. We are now seeing racially-segregated graduationsand everything, but everything, is deÞned through the lens ofperceived Ôracism. We have ÔracistÕ mathematics, ÔracistÕ food andeven ÔracistÕ plants. World famous Kew Gardens in London said itwas changing labels on plants and ßowers to tell its pre-ÔCovidÕmore than two million visitors a year how racist they are. Kewdirector Richard Deverell said this was part of an e.ort to Ômovequickly to decolonise collectionsÕ aere approached by oneAjay Chhabra Ôan actor with an insight into how sugar cane waslinked to slaveryÕ. They are plants you idiots. ÔDecolonisationÕ in theWoke manual really means colonisation of society with its mentalityand by extension colonisation by the Cult. We are witnessing a newChinese-style ÔCultural RevolutionÕ so essential to the success of allMarxist takeovers. Our cultural past and traditions have to be sweptaway to allow a new culture to be built-back-be. Woke targetingof long-standing Western cultural pillars including historicalmonuments and cancelling of historical Þgures is what happened inthe Mao revolution in China which Ôpurged remnants of capitalistand traditional elements from Chinese societyÔ and installed Maoismas the dominant ideologyÔ. For China see the Western world todayand for Ôdominant ideologyÕ see Woke. BeMaoism. The ÔCovidÕ hoax has speciÞcally sought to destroy the artsand all elements of Western culture from people meeting in a pub orrestaurant to closing theatres, music venues, sports stadiums, placesof worship and even banning singing. Destruction of Western societyis also why criticism of any religion is banned except for Christianitywhich again is the dominant religion as white is the numerically-dominant race. Christianity may be fading rapidly, but its historyand traditions are weaved through the fabric of Western society.Delete the pillars and other structures will follow until the wholething collapses. I am not a Christian defending that religion when Isay that. I have no religion. ItÕs just a fact. To this end Christianityhas itself been turned Woke to usher its own downfall and its ranksare awash with Ôchange agentsÕ Ð knowing and unknowing Ð atevery level including Pope Francis (definitely knowing) and theclueless Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby (possibly not, butwho can be sure?). Woke seeks to coordinate aesternculture, traditions, and ways of life through ÔintersectionalityÕdeÞned as Ôthe complex, cumulative way in which the e.ects ofmultiple forms of discrimination (such as racism, sexism, andclassism) combine, overlap, or intersect especially in the experiencesof marginalised individuals or groupsÕ. Wade through the OrwellianWoke-speak and this means coordinating disparate groups in acommon cause to overthrow freedom and liberal values.
The entire structure of public institutions has been infested withWoke Ð government at all levels, political parties, police, military,schools, universities, advertising, media and trade unions. Thisabomination has been achieved through the Cult web by appointingWokers to positions of power and baWokers into linethrough intimidation, isolation and threats to their job. Many havebeen Þred in the wake of the empathy-deleted, vicious hostility ofÔsocial justiceÕ Wokers and the desire of gutless, spineless employersto virtue-signal their Wokeness. Corporations are Þlled with Wokerstoday, most notably those in Silicon Valley. Ironically at the top theyare not Woke at all. They are only exploiting the mentality their Cultmasters have created and funded to censor and enslave while theWokers cheer them on until itÕs their turn. Thus the Woke Ôliberalleersion of the traditional liberal lejustice on the grounds of power and wealth distribution has beenreplaced by campaigning for identity politics. The genuinetraditional leould never have taken money from todayÕsbillionaire abusers of fairness and justice and nor would thebillionaires have wanted to fund that genuine leould not havebeen in their interests to do so. The division of opinion in those dayswas between the haves and have nots. This all changed with Cultmanipulated and funded identity politics. The division of opiniontoday is between Wokers and non-Wokers and not income brackets.Cult corporations and their billionaires may have taken wealthdisparity to cataclysmic levels of injustice, but as long as they speakthe language of Woke, hand out the dosh to the Woke network andcensor the enemy they are Ôone of usÕ. Billionaires who donÕt give adamn about injustice are laughing at them till their bellies hurt.Wokers are not even close to self-aware enough to see that. Thetransformed Ôleokers who drone on aboutÔsocial justiceÕ are funded by billionaires that have destroyed socialjustice the world over. ItÕs why they are billionaires.
The climate con 
Nothing encapsulates what I have said more comprehensively thanthe hoax of human-caused global warming. I have detailed in mybooks over the years how Cult operatives and organisations were thepump-primers from the start of the climate con. A purpose-builtvehicle for this is the Club of Rome established by the Cult in 1968with the Rockefellers and Rothschilds centrally involved all along.Their gofer frontman Maurice Strong, a Canadian oil millionaire,hosted the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992 where theglobal Ôgreen movementÕ really expanded in earnest under theguiding hand of the Cult. The Earth Summit established Agenda 21through the Cult-created-and-owned United Nations to use theillusion of human-caused climate change to justify thetransformation of global society to save the world from climatedisaster. It is a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution sold throughgovernments, media, schools and universities as whole generationshave been terriÞed into believing that the world was going to end intheir lifetimes unless what old people had inßicted upon them wasstopped by a complete restructuring of how everything is done.Chill, kids, itÕs all a hoax. Such restructuring is precisely what theCult agenda demands (purely by coincidence of course). Today thishas been given the codename of the Great Reset which is only anupdated term for Agenda 21 and its associated Agenda 2030. Thela, too, is administered through the UN and was voted into beingby the General Assembly in 2015. Both 21 and 2030 seek centralisedcontrol of all resources and food right down to the raindrops fallingon your own land. These are some of the demands of Agenda 21established in 1992. See if you recognise this society emerging today:
¥
End national sovereignty

¥
State planning and management of all land resources, ecosystems,deserts, forests, mountains, oceans and fresh water; agriculture;rural development; biotechnology; and ensuring ÔequityÕ 

¥
The state to ÔdeÞne the roleÕ of business and Þnancial resources

¥
Abolition of private property

¥
ÔRestructuringÕ the family unit (see BLM)

¥
Children raised by the state

¥
People told what their job will be

¥
Major restrictions on movement

¥
Creation of Ôhuman se

¥
Mass reseacate land where theylive

¥
Dumbing down education

¥
Mass global depopulation in pursuit of all the above


The United Nations was created as a Trojan horse for worldgovernment. With the climate con of critical importance topromoting that outcome you would expect the UN to be involved.Oh, itÕs involved all right. The UN is promoting Agenda 21 andAgenda 2030 justiÞed by Ôclimate changeÕ while also driving theclimate hoax through its Intergovernmental Panel on ClimateChange (IPCC), one of the worldÕs most corrupt organisations. TheIPCC has been lying ferociously and constantly since the day itopened its doors with the global media hanging unquestioningly onits every mendacious word. The Green movement is entirely Wokeand has long lost its original environmental focus since it was co-opted by the Cult. An obsession with Ôglobal warmingÕ has deletedits values and scrambled its head. I experienced a small example ofwhat I mean on a beautiful country walk that I have enjoyed severaltimes a week for many years. The path merged into the Þelds andforests and you felt at one with the natural world. Then a ÔGreenÕorganisation, the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust, tookover part of the land and proceeded to cut down a large number oftrees, including mature ones, to install a horrible big, bright steelÔthis-is-ours-stay-outÕ fence that destroyed the whole atmosphere ofthis beautiful place. No one with a feel for nature would do that. Dayaalked to the sound of chainsaws and a magniÞcentmature weeping willow tree that I so admired was cut down at thebase of the trunk. When I challenged a Woke young girl in a greenshirt (of course) about this vandalism she replied: ÔItÕs a weepingwillow Ð it will grow back.Õ This is what people are paying for whenthey donate to the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust andmany other ÔgreenÕ organisations today. It is not the environmentalmovement that I knew and instead has become a support-system Ðas with Extinction Rebellion Ð for a very dark agenda.
Private jets for climate justice 
The Cult-owned, Gates-funded, World Economic Forum and itsfounder Klaus Schwab were behind the emergence of GretaThunberg to harness the young behind the climate agenda and shewas invited to speak to the world at É the UN. Schwab published abook, Covid-19: The Great Reset in 2020 in which he used the ÔCovidÕhoax and the climate hoax to lay out a new society straight out ofAgenda 21 and Agenda 2030. Bill Gates followed in early 2021 whenhe took time out from destroying the world to produce a book in hisname about the way to save it. Gates ßies across the world in privatejets and admie one of the highestgreenhouse gas footprints of anyone on the planet É my personalßying alone is gigantic.Õ He has also bid for the planetÕs biggestprivate jet operator. Other climate change saviours who ßy in privatejets include John Kerry, the US Special Presidential Envoy forClimate, and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, a ÔUN Messenger of Peacewith special focus on climate changeÕ. These people are so full ofbullshit they could corner the market in manure. We mustnÕt besceptical, though, because the Gates book, How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need, is agenuine aorld and not an obvious pile ofexcrement amastersÕ plans for humanity. The Gates book and the other shite-pileby Klaus Schwab could have been wrimay well have been. Both use Ôclimate changeÕ and ÔCovidÕ as theexcuses for their new society and by coincidence the CultÕs WorldEconomic Forum and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation promotethe climate hoax and hosted Event 201 which pre-empted with aÔsimulationÕ the very ÔcoronavirusÕ hoax that would be simulated forreal on humanity within weeks. The British ÔroyalÕ family ispromoting the ÔResetÕ as you would expect through Prince Ôclimatechange caused the war in SyriaÕ Charles and his hapless son PrinceWilliam who said that we must Ôreset our relationship with natureand our trajectory as a speciesÕ to avoid a climate disaster. Amazinghow many promotors of the ÔCovidÕ and Ôclimate changeÕ controlsystems are connected to Gates and the World Economic Forum. AÔstudyÕ in early 2021 claimed that carbon dioxide emissions must fallby the equivalent of a global lockdown roughly every two years forthe next decade to save the planet. The ÔstudyÕ appeared in the sameperiod that the Schwab mob claimed in a video that lockdownsdestroying the lives of billions are good because they make the earthÔquieterÕ with less Ôambient noiseÕ. They took down the video amid apublic backlash for such arrogant, empathy-deleted stupidity Yousee, however, where they are going with this. Corinne Le QuŽrŽ, aprofessor at the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research,University of East Anglia, was lead author of the climate lockdownstudy, and she writes for É the World Economic Forum. Gates callsin ÔhisÕ book for changing Ôevery aspect of the economyÕ (long-timeCult agenda) and for humans to eat synthetic ÔmeatÕ (predicted inmy books) while cows and other farm animals are eliminated.Australian TV host and commentator Alan Jones described whatcarbon emission targets would mean for farm animals in Australiaalone if emissions were reduced as demanded by 35 percent by 2030and zero by 2050:
Well, letÕs take agriculture, the total emissions from agriculture are about 75 million tonnes of carbon dioxide, equivalent. Now reduce that by 35 percent and you have to come down to 50 million tonnes, IÕve done the maths. So if you take for example 1.5 million cows, youÕre going to have to reduce the herd by 525,000 [by] 2030, nine years, thatÕs 58,000 cows a year. The beef herdÕs 30 million, reduce that by 35 percent, thatÕs 10.5 million, which means 1.2 million cattle have to go every year between now and 2030. This is insanity! 
There are 75 million sheep. Reduce that by 35 percent, thatÕs 26 million sheep, thatÕs almost 3 million a year. So under the Paris Agreement over 30 million beasts. dairy cows, cattle, pigs and sheep would go. More than 8,000 every minute of every hour for the next decade, do these people know what theyÕre talking about? 
Clearly they donÕt at the level of campaigners, politicians andadministrators. The Cult does know; thatÕs the outcome it wants. Weare faced with not just a war on humanity. Animals and the naturalworld are being targeted and I have been saying since the ÔCovidÕhoax began that the plan eventually was to claim that the ÔdeadlyvirusÕ is able to jump from animals, including farm animals anddomestic pets, to humans. Just before this book went into productioncame this story: ÔRussia registers worldÕs Þrst Covid-19 vaccine forcats & dogs as makers of Sputnik V warn pets & farm animals couldspread virusÕ. The report said Ôtop scientists warned that the deadlypathogen could soon begin spreading through homes and farmsÕand Ôthe next stage is the infection of farm and domestic animalsÕ.Know the outcome and youÕll see the journey. Think what thatwould mean for animals and keep your eye on a term calledzoonosis or zoonotic diseases which transmit between animals andhumans. The Cult wants to break the connection between animalsand people as it does between people and people. Farm animals Þtwith the Cult agenda to transform food from natural to synthetic.
The gas of life is killing us 
There can be few greater examples of Cult inversion than thecondemnation of carbon dioxide as a dangerous pollutant when it isthe gas of life. Without it the natural world would be dead and so wewould all be dead. We breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbondioxide while plants produce oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide. Itis a perfect symbiotic relationship that the Cult wants to dismantlefor reasons I will come to in the Þnal two chapters. Gates, Schwab,other Cult operatives and mindless repeaters, want the world to beÔcarbon neutralÕ by at least 2050 and the earlier the be. ÔZerocarbonÕ is the cry echoed by lunatics calling for ÔZero CovidÕ whenwe already have it. These carbon emission targets willdeindustrialise the world in accordance with Cult plans Ð the post.industrial, post-democratic society Ð and with so-called renewableslike solar and wind not coming even close to meeting human energyneeds blackouts and cold are inevitable. Texans got the picture in thewinter of 2021 when a snow storm stopped wind turbines and solarpanels from working and the lights went down along with waterwhich relies on electricity for its supply system. Gates wantseverything to be powered by electricity to ensure that his mastershave the kill switch to stop all human activity, movement, cooking,water and warmth any time they like. The climate lie is so
stupendously inverted that it claims we must urgently reducecarbon dioxide when we donÕt have enough.
Co2 in the atmosphere is a lie 400 parts per million whenthe optimum for plant growth is 2,000 ppm and when it fallsanywhere near 150 ppm the natural world starts to die and so do we.It fell to as low as 280 ppm in an 1880 measurement in Hawaii androse to 413 ppm in 2019 with industrialisation which is why theplanet has become greener in the industrial period. How insane thenthat psychopathic madman Gates is not satisÞed only with blockingthe rise of Co2. HeÕs funding technology to suck it out of theatmosphere. The reason why will become clear. The industrial era isnot destroying the world through Co2 and has instead turnedaround a potentially disastrous ongoing fall in Co2. Greenpeace co-founder and scientist Patrick Moore walked away from Greenpeacein 1986 and has exposed the green movement for fear-mongeringand lies. He said that 500 million years ago there was 17 times moreCo2 in the atmosphere than we have today and levels have beenfalling for hundreds of millions of years. In the last 150 million yearsCo2 levels in EarthÕs atmosphere had reduced by 90 percent. Mooresaid that by the time humanity began to unlock carbon dioxide fromfossil fuels we were at Ô38 seconds to midnightÕ and in that sense:ÔHumans are [the EarthÕs] salvation.Õ Moore made the point that onlyhalf the Co2 emieshould remember that all pollution pouring from chimneys that weare told is carbon dioxide is in fact nothing of the kind. ItÕs pollution.Carbon dioxide is an invisible gas.
William Happer, Professor of Physics at Princeton University andlong-time government adviser on climate, has emphasised the Co2deÞciency for maximum growth and food production. Greenhousegrowers donÕt add carbon dioxide for a bit of fun. He said that mostof the warming in the last 100 years, athe super-cold period of the ÔLiarmingcycle, was over by 1940. Happer said that a peak year for warming in1988 can be explained by a Ômonster El NinoÕ which is a natural andcyclical warming of the PaciÞc that has nothing to do with ÔclimatechangeÕ. He said the e.ect of Co2 could be compared to painting awall with red paint in that once two or three coats have been appliedit didnÕt maou slapped on because the wallwill not get much redder. Almost all the e.ect of the rise in Co2 hasalready happened, he said, and the volume in the atmosphere wouldnow have to double to increase temperature by a single degree.Climate hoaxers know this and they have invented the mostridiculously complicated series of ÔfeedbackÕ loops to try toovercome this rather devastating fact. You hear puppet Greta goingon cluelessly about feedback loops and this is why.
The Sun affects temperature? No you climate denier 
Some other nonsense to contemplate: Climate graphs show that risesin temperature do not follow rises in Co2 Ð itÕs the other way round with a lag between the two of some 800 years. If we go back 800years from present time we hit the Medieval Warm Period whentemperatures were higher than now without any industrialisationand this was followed by the Liplummeted. The world was still emerging from these centuries ofserious cold when many climate records began which makes theever-repeated line of the Ôhoear since records beganÕmeaningless when you are not comparing like with like. The coldestperiod of the Liest period ofsunspot activity when the Sun was at its least active. Properscientists will not be at all surprised by this when it conÞrms theobvious fact that earth temperature is a.ected by the scale of Sunactivity and the energetic power that it subsequently emits; butwhen is the last time you heard a climate hoaxer talking about theSun as a source of earth temperature?? Everything has to be focussedon Co2 which makes up just 0.117 percent of so-called greenhousegases and only a fraction of even that is generated by human activity.The rest is natural. More than 90 percent of those greenhouse gasesare water vapour and clouds (Fig 9). Ban moisture I say. Have younoticed that the climate hoaxers no longer use the polar bear as theirpromotion image? ThatÕs because far from becoming extinct polarbear communities are stable or thriving. Joe Bastardi, Americanmeteorologist, weather forecaster and outspoken critic of the climatelie, documents in his book The Climate Chronicles how weatherpaents claimed to be evidence of climate change havebeen happening since long before industrialisation: ÔWhat happenedbefore naturally is happening again, as is to be expected given thecyclical nature of the climate due to the design of the planet.Õ If youread the detailed background to the climate hoax in my other booksyou will shake your head and wonder how anyone could believe thecrap which has spawned a multi-trillion dollar industry based onabsolute garbage (see HIV causes AIDs and Sars-Cov-2 causesÔCovid-19Õ). Climate and ÔCovidÕ have much in common given theyhave the same source. They both have the contradictory everything factor in which everything is explained by reference to them. ItÕs hotÐ ÔitÕs climate changeÕ. ItÕs cold Ð ÔitÕs climate changeÕ. I got a sni.e ÐÔitÕs CovidÕ. I havenÕt got a sni.e Ð ÔitÕs CovidÕ. Not having a sni.ehas to be a symptom of ÔCovidÕ. Everything is and not having asni.e is especially dangerous if you are a slow walker. For sheeraudacity I o.er you a Cambridge University ÔstudyÕ that actuallylinked ÔCovidÕ to Ôclimate changeÕ. It had to happen eventually. Theyconcluded that climate change played a role in ÔCovid-19Õ spreadingfrom animals to humans because É wait for it É I kid you not É the two groups were forced closer together as populations grow. Er, thatÕs it.The whole foundation on which this depended was that ÔBats are thelikely zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2Õ. Well, theyare not. They are nothing to do with it. Apart from bats not being theorigin and therefore Ôclimate changeÕ e.ects on bats being irrelevantI am in awe of their academic insight. Where would we be withoutthem? Not where we are thatÕs for sure.

Figure 9: The idea that the gas of life is disastrously changing the climate is an insult to brain cell activity. 
One other point about the weather is that climate modiÞcation isnow well advanced and not every major weather event is natural Ðor earthquake come to that. I cover this subject at some length inother books. China is openly planning a rapid expansion of itsweather modiÞcation programme which includes changing theclimate in an area more than one and a half times the size of India.China used weather manipulation to ensure clear skies during the2008 Olympics in Be.ing. I have quoted from US military documentsdetailing how to employ weather manipulation as a weapon of warand they did that in the 1960s and 70s during the conßict in Vietnamwith Operation Popeye manipulating monsoon rains for militarypurposes. Why would there be international treaties on weathermodiÞcation if it wasnÕt possible? Of course it is. Weather isenergetic information and it can be changed.
How was the climate hoax pulled off? See ÔCovidÕ 
If you can get billions to believe in a ÔvirusÕ that doesnÕt exist you canget them to believe in human-caused climate change that doesnÕtexist. Both are being used by the Cult to transform global society inthe way it has long planned. Both hoaxes have been achieved inpreay. First you declare a lie is a fact. ThereÕs aÔvirusÕ you call SARS-Cov-2 or humans are warming the planet withtheir behaviour. Next this becomes, via Cult networks, thefoundation of government, academic and science policy and belief.Those who parrot the mantra are given big grants to produceresearch that conÞrms the narrative is true and ever moreÔsymptomsÕ are added to make the ÔvirusÕ/Õclimate changeÕ soundeven more scary. Scientists and researchers who challenge thenarrative have their grants withdrawn and their careers destroyed.The media promote the lie as the unquestionable truth and censorthose with an alternative view or evidence. A great percentage of thepopulation believe what they are told as the lie becomes aneverybody-knows-that and the believing-masses turn on those witha mind of their own. The technique has been used endlesslythroughout human history. Wokers are the biggest promotors of theclimate lie and ÔCovidÕ fascism because their minds are owned by theCult; their sense of self-righteous self-purity knows no bounds; andthey exist in a bubble of reality in which facts are irrelevant and onlyget in the way of looking without seeing.
Running through all of this like veins in a blue cheese is control ofinformation, which means control of perception, which meanscontrol of behaviour, which collectively means control of humansociety. The Cult owns the global media and Silicon Valley fascistsfor the simple reason that it has to. Without control of information itcanÕt control perception and through that human society. Examineevery facet of the Cult agenda and you will see that anythingsupporting its introduction is never censored while anythingpushing back is always censored. I say again: Psychopaths that knowwhy they are doing this must go before Nuremberg trials and thosethat follow their orders must trot along behind them into the samedock. ÔI was just following ordersÕ didnÕt work the Þrst time and itmust not work now. Nuremberg trials must be held all over theworld before public juries for politicians, government o.cials,police, compliant doctors, scientists and virologists, and all Cultoperatives such as Gates, Tedros, Fauci, Vallance, Whi, Ferguson,Zuckerberg, Wojcicki, Brin, Page, Dorsey, the whole damn lot ofthem Ð including, no especially, the psychopath psychologists.Without them and the brainless, gutless excuses for journalists thathave repeated their lies, none of this could be happening. Nobodycan be allowed to escape justice for the psychological and economicArmageddon they are all responsible for visiting upon the humanrace.
As for the compliant, unquestioning, swathes of humanity, and theself-obsessed, all-knowing ignorance of the Wokers É donÕt start me.God help their kids. God help their grandkids. God help them.
CHAPTER NINE 
We must have it? So what is it? 
Well I wonÕt back down. No, I wonÕt back down. You can stand me up at the Gates of Hell. But I wonÕt back down 
Tom Petty 
Iwill now focus on the genetically-manipulating ÔCovid vaccinesÕwhich do not meet this o.cial deÞnition of a vaccine by the USCenters for Disease Control (CDC): ÔA product that stimulates apersonÕs immune system to produce immunity to a speciÞc disease,protecting the person from that disease.Õ On that basis ÔCovidvaccinesÕ are not a vaccine in that the makers donÕt even claim theystop infection or transmission.
They are instead part of a multi-levelled conspiracy to change thenature of the human body and what it means to be ÔhumanÕ and todepopulate an enormous swathe of humanity. What I shall callHuman 1.0 is on the cusp of becoming Human 2.0 and for verysinister reasons. Before I get to the ÔCovid vaccineÕ in detail hereÕssome background to vaccines in general. Government regulators donot test vaccines Ð the makers do Ð and the makers control whichdata is revealed and which isnÕt. Children in America are given 50vaccine doses by age six and 69 by age 19 and the e.ect of the wholecombined schedule has never been tested. Autoimmune diseaseswhen the immune system ae soared in themass vaccine era and so has disease in general in children and theyoung. Why wouldnÕt this be the case when vaccines target theimmune system? The US government gave Big Pharma drugcompanies immunity from prosecution for vaccine death and injuryin the 1986 National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act (NCVIA) andsince then the government (taxpayer) has been fundingcompensation for the consequences of Big Pharma vaccines. Thecriminal and satanic drug giants canÕt lose and the vaccine schedulehas increased dramatically since 1986 for this reason. There is noincentive to make vaccines safe and a big incentive to make moneyby introducing ever more. Even against a ridiculously high bar toprove vaccine liability, and with the government controlling thehearing in which it is being challenged for compensation, the vaccinecourt has so far paid out more than $4 billion. These are the vaccineswe are told are safe and psychopaths like Zuckerberg censor postssaying otherwise. The immunity law was even justiÞed by a rulingthat vaccines by their nature were Ôunavoidably unsafeÕ.
Check out the ingredients of vaccines and you will be shocked ifyou are new to this. They put that in childrenÕs bodies?? What?? Tryaluminium, a brain toxin connected to dementia, aborted foetaltissue and formaldehyde which is used to embalm corpses. World-renowned aluminium expert Christopher Exley had his research intothe health e.ect of aluminium in vaccines shut down by KeeleUniversity in the UK when it began taking funding from the Bill andMelinda Gates Foundation. Research when diseases ÔeradicatedÕ byvaccines began to decline and you will Þnd the fall began long before the vaccine was introduced. Sometimes the fall even plateaued aerthe vaccine. Diseases like scarlet fever for which there was novaccine declined in the same way because of environmental andother factors. A perfect case in point is the polio vaccine. Polio beganwhen lead arsenate was Þrst sprayed as an insecticide and residuesremained in food products. Spraying started in 1892 and the Þrst USpolio epidemic came in Vermont in 1894. The simple answer was tostop spraying, but Rockefeller-created Big Pharma had a bePolio was decreed to be caused by the poliovirus which Ôspreads fromperson to person and can infect a personÕs spinal cordÕ. Leadarsenate was replaced by the lethal DDT which had the same e.ectof causing paralysis by damaging the brain and central nervoussystem. Polio plummeted when DDT was reduced and then banned,but the vaccine is still given the credit for something it didnÕt do.Today by far the biggest cause of polio is the vaccines promoted byBill Gates. Vaccine justice campaigner Robert Kennedy Jr, son ofassassinated (by the Cult) US A,wrote:
In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) reluctantly admitted that the global explosion in polio is predominantly vaccine strain. The most frightening epidemics in Congo, Afghanistan, and the Philippines, are all linked to vaccines. In fact, by 2018, 70% of global polio cases were vaccine strain. 
Vaccines make fortunes for Cult-owned Gates and Big Pharmawhile undermining the health and immune systems of thepopulation. We had a glimpse of the mentality behind the BigPharma cartel with a report on WION (World is One News), aninternational English language TV station based in India, whichexposed the extraordinary behaviour of US drug company PÞzerover its ÔCovid vaccineÕ. The WION report told how PÞzer had madefantastic demands of Argentina, Brazil and other countries in returnfor its ÔvaccineÕ. These included immunity from prosecution, evenfor PÞzer negligence, government insurance to protect PÞzer fromlaw suits and handing over as collateral sovereign assets of thecountry to include ArgentinaÕs bank reserves, military bases andembassy buildings. PÞzer demanded the same of Brazil in the formof waiving sovereignty of its assets abroad; exempting PÞzer fromBrazilian laws; and giving PÞzer immunity from all civil liability.This is a ÔvaccineÕ developed with government funding. Big Pharmais evil incarnate as a creation of the Cult and all must be handedtickets to Nuremberg.
Phantom ÔvaccineÕ for a phantom ÔdiseaseÕ 
IÕll expose the ÔCovid vaccineÕ fraud and then go on to the widerbackground of why the Cult has set out to ÔvaccinateÕ every man,woman and child on the planet for an alleged Ônew diseaseÕ with asurvival rate of 99.77 percent (or more) even by the grotesquely.manipulated Þgures of the World Health Organization and JohnsHopkins University. The ÔinfectionÕ to ÔdeathÕ ratio is 0.23 to 0.15percent according to Stanford epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis andwhile estimates vary the danger remains tiny. I say that if the truthbe told the fake infection to fake death ratio is zero. Never mind allthe evidence I have presented here and in The Answer that there is noÔvirusÕ let us just focus for a moment on that death-rate Þgure of say
0.23 percent. The Þgure includes all those worldwide who havetested positive with a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ and then diedwithin 28 days or even longer of any other cause Ð any other cause.Now subtract all those illusory ÔCovidÕ deaths on the global datasheets from the 0.23 percent. What do you think you would be lewith? Zero. A vaccination has never been successfully developed fora so-called coronavirus. They have all failed at the animal testingstage when they caused hypersensitivity to what they were claimingto protect against and made the impact of a disease far worse. Cult-owned vaccine corporations got around that problem this time bybypassing animal trials, going straight to humans and making thelength of the ÔtrialsÕ before the public rollout as short as they couldget away with. Normally it takes Þve to ten years or more to developvaccines that still cause demonstrable harm to many people andthatÕs without including the long-term e.ects that are never o.ciallyconnected to the vaccination. ÔCovidÕ non-vaccines have beeno.cially produced and approved in a mastanding start and part of the reason is that (a) they were developedbefore the ÔCovidÕ hoax began and (b) they are based on computerprograms and not natural sources. O.cial non-trials were so shortthat government agencies gave emergency, not full, approval. ÔTrialsÕwere not even completed and full approval cannot be secured untilthey are. Public ÔCovid vaccinationÕ is actually a continuation of the trial. Drug company ÔtrialsÕ are not scheduled to end until 2023 bywhich time a lot of people are going to be dead. Data on whichgovernment agencies gave this emergency approval was supplied bythe Big Pharma corporations themselves in the form ofPÞzer/BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, andothers, and this is the case with all vaccines. By its very natureemergency approval means drug companies do not have to prove thatthe ÔvaccineÕ is Ôsafe and e.ectiveÕ. How could they with trials wayshort of complete? Government regulators only have to believe thatthey could be safe and e.ective. It is criminal manipulation to getproducts in circulation with no testing worth the name. Agenciesgiving that approval are infested with Big Pharma-connected place-people and they act in the interests of Big Pharma (the Cult) and notthe public about whom they do not give a damn.
More human lab rats 
ÔCovid vaccinesÕ produced in record time by PÞzer/BioNTech andModerna employ a technique never approved before for use on humans.They are known as mRNA ÔvaccinesÕ and inject a synthetic version ofÔviralÕ mRNA or Ômessenger RNAÕ. The key is in the termÔmessengerÕ. The body works, or doesnÕt, on the basis of informationmessaging. Communications are constantly passing between andwithin the genetic system and the brain. Change those messages andyou change the state of the body and even its very nature and youcan change psychology and behaviour by the way the brainprocesses information. I think you are going to see signiÞcantchanges in personality and perception of many people who have hadthe ÔCovid vaccineÕ synthetic potions. Insider Aldous Huxleypredicted the following in 1961 and mRNA ÔvaccinesÕ can beincluded in the term Ôpharmacological methodsÕ:
There will be, in the next generation or so, a pharmacological method of making people love their servitude, and producing dictatorship without tears, so to speak, producing a kind of painless concentration camp for entire societies, so that people will in fact have their own liberties taken away from them, but rather enjoy it, because they will be distracted from any desire to rebel by propaganda or brainwashing, or brainwashing enhanced by pharmacological methods. And this seems to be the final revolution. 
Apologists claim that mRNA synthetic ÔvaccinesÕ donÕt change theDNA genetic blueprint because RNA does not a.ect DNA only theother way round. This is so disingenuous. A process called ÔreversetranscriptionÕ can convert RNA into DNA and be integrated intoDNA in the cell nucleus. This was highlighted in December, 2020, byscientists at Harvard and Massachuseechnology(MIT). Geneticists report that more than 40 percent of mammaliangenomes results from reverse transcription. On the most basic levelif messaging changes then that sequence must lead to changes inDNA which is receiving and transmiHow can introducing synthetic material into cells not change thecells where DNA is located? The process is known as transfectionwhich is deÞned as Ôa technique to insert foreign nucleic acid (DNAor RNA) into a cell, typically with the intention of altering theproperties of the cellÕ. Researchers at the Sloan KeNew York found that changes in messenger RNA can deactivatetumour-suppressing proteins and thereby promote cancer. This iswhat happens when you mess with messaging. ÔCovid vaccineÕmaker Moderna was founded in 2010 by Canadian stem cellbiologist Derrick J. Rossi aer his breakthrough discovery in the Þeldof transforming and reprogramming stem cells. These are neutralcells that can be programmed to become any cell including spermcells. Moderna was therefore founded on the principle of geneticmanipulation and has never produced any vaccine or drug before itsgenetically-manipulating synthetic ÔCovidÕ shite. Look at the name ÐMode-RNA or Modify-RNA. Another important point is that the USSupreme Court has ruled that genetically-modiÞed DNA, orcomplementary DNA (cDNA) synthesized in the laboratory frommessenger RNA, can be patented and owned. These psychopaths aredoing this to the human body.
Cells replicate synthetic mRNA in the ÔCovid vaccinesÕ and intheory the body is tricked into making antigens which triggerantibodies to target the Ôvirus spike proteinsÕ which as Dr TomCowan said have never been seen. Cut the crap and these ÔvaccinesÕdeliver self-replicating synthetic material to the cells with the e.ect ofchanging human DNA. The more of them you have the more thatprocess is compounded while synthetic material is all the time self-replicating. ÔVaccineÕ-maker Moderna describes mRNA as Ôlikesoware for the cellÕ and so they are messing with the bodyÕssoware. What happens when you change the soware in acomputer? Everything changes. For this reason the Cult is preparinga production line of mRNA ÔCovid vaccinesÕ and a long list ofexcuses to use them as with all the ÔvariantsÕ of a ÔvirusÕ never shownto exist. The plan is further to transfer the mRNA technique to othervaccines mostly given to children and young people. The cumulativeconsequences will be a transformation of human DNA through aconstant infusion of synthetic genetic material which will kill manyand change the rest. Now consider that governments that have givenemergency approval for a vaccine thatÕs not a vaccine; never beenapproved for humans before; had no testing worth the name; andthe makers have been given immunity from prosecution for anydeaths or adverse e.ects su.ered by the public. The UK governmentawarded permanent legal indemnity to itself and its employees forharm done when a patient is being treated for ÔCovid-19Õ orÔsuspected Covid-19Õ. That is quite a thought when these are possibleÔside-e.ectsÕ from the ÔvaccineÕ (they are not ÔsideÕ, they are e.ects)listed by the US Food and Drug Administration:
Guillain-Barre syndrome; acute disseminated encephalomyelitis;transverse myelitis; encephalitis; myelitis; encephalomyelitis;meningoencephalitis; meningitis; encephalopathy; convulsions;seizures; stroke; narcolepsy; cataplexy; anaphylaxis; acutemyocardial infarction (heart aocarditis; pericarditis;autoimmune disease; death; implications for pregnancy, and birthoutcomes; other acute demyelinating diseases; non anaphylacticallergy reactions; thrombocytopenia ; disseminated intravascularcoagulation; venous thromboembolism; arthritis; arthralgia; jointpain; Kawasaki disease; multisystem inßammatory syndrome inchildren; vaccine enhanced disease. The laay theÔvaccineÕ has the potential to make diseases far worse than theywould otherwise be.
UK doctor and freedom campaigner Vernon Coleman describedthe conditions in this list as Ôall unpleasant, most of them veryserious, and you canÕt get more serious than deathÕ. The thought thatanyone at all has had the ÔvaccineÕ in these circumstances istestament to the potential that humanity has for clueless,unquestioning, stupidity and for many that programmed stupidityhas already been terminal.
An insider speaks 
Dr Michael Yeadon is a former Vice President, head of research andChief ScientiÞc Adviser at vaccine giant PÞzer. Yeadon worked onthe inside of Big Pharma, but that did not stop him becoming a vocalcritic of ÔCovid vaccinesÕ and their potential for multiple harms,including infertility in women. By the spring of 2021 he went muchfurther and even used the no, no, term ÔconspiracyÕ. When you beginto see what is going on it is impossible not to do so. Yeadon spokeout in an interview with freedom campaigner James Delingpole andI mentioned earlier how he said that no one had samples of ÔthevirusÕ. He explained that the mRNA technique originated in the anti.cancer Þeld and ways to turn on and o. certain genes which couldbe advantageous if you wanted to stop cancer growing out ofcontrol. ÔThatÕs the origin of them. They are a very unusualapplication, really.Õ Yeadon said that treating a cancer patient withan aggressive procedure might be understandable if the alternativewas dying, but it was quite another thing to use the same techniqueas a public health measure. Most people involved wouldnÕt catch theinfectious agent you were vaccinating against and if they did theyprobably wouldnÕt die:
If you are really using it as a public health measure you really want to as close as you can get to zero sides-effects É I find it odd that they chose techniques that were really cutting their teeth in the field of oncology and IÕm worried that in using gene-based vaccines that have to be injected in the body and spread around the body, get taken up into some cells, and the regulators havenÕt quite told us which cells they get taken up into É you are going to be generating a wide range of responses É with multiple steps each of which could go well or badly. 
I doubt the Cult intends it to go well. Yeadon said that you can putany gene you like into the body through the ÔvaccineÕ. ÔYou cancertainly give them a gene that would do them some harm if youwanted.Õ I was intrigued when he said that when used in the cancerÞeld the technique could turn genes on and o.. I explore this processin The Answer and with di.erent genes having di.erent functionsyou could create mayhem Ð physically and psychologically Ð if youturned the wrong ones on and the right ones o.. I read reports of anexperiment by researchers at the University of WashingtonÕs schoolof computer science and engineering in which they encoded DNA toinfect computers. The body is itself a biological computer and ifhuman DNA can inßict damage on a computer why canÕt thecomputer via synthetic material mess with the human body? It can.The Washington research team said it was possible to insertmalicious malware into Ôphysical DNA strandsÕ and corrupt thecomputer system of a gene sequencing machine as it Ôreads genelehackers could one day use blood or spit samples to access computersystems and obtain sensitive data from police forensics labs or infectgenome Þles. It is at this level of digital interaction that syntheticÔvaccinesÕ need to be seen to get the full picture and that will becomevery clear later on. Michael Yeadon said it made no sense to give theÔvaccineÕ to younger people who were in no danger from the ÔvirusÕ.What was the beneÞt? It was all downside with potential e.ects:
The fact that my government in what I thought was a civilised, rational country, is raining [the ÔvaccineÕ] on people in their 30s and 40s, even my children in their 20s, theyÕre getting letters and phone calls, I know this is not right and any of you doctors who are vaccinating you know itÕs not right, too. They are not at risk. They are not at risk from the disease, so you are now hoping that the side-effects are so rare that you get away with it. You donÕt give new technology É that you donÕt understand to 100 percent of the population. 
Blood clot problems with the AstraZeneca ÔvaccineÕ have beena.ecting younger people to emphasise the downside risks with nobeneÞt. AstraZenecaÕs version, produced with Oxford University,does not use mRNA, but still gets its toxic cocktail inside cells whereit targets DNA. The Johnson & Johnson ÔvaccineÕ which uses asimilar technique has also produced blood clot e.ects to such anextent that the United States paused its use at one point. They are allÔgene therapyÕ (cell modiÞcation) procedures and not ÔvaccinesÕ. Thetruth is that once the content of these injections enter cells we haveno idea what the e.ect will be. People can speculate and some cangive very educated opinions and thatÕs good. In the end, though,only the makers know what their potions are designed to do andeven they wonÕt know every last consequence. Michael Yeadon wasscathing about doctors doing what they knew to be wrong.ÔEveryoneÕs muteÕ, he said. Doctors in the NHS must know this wasnot right, coming into work and injecting people. ÔI donÕt know howthey sleep at night. I know I couldnÕt do it. I know that if I were inthat position IÕd have to quit.Õ He said he knew enough abouttoxicology to know this was not a good risk-beneÞt. Yeadon hadspoken to seven or eight university professors and all except twowould not speak out publicly. Their universities had a policy that noone said anything that countered the government and its medicaladvisors. They were afraid of losing their government grants. This ishow intimidation has been used to silence the truth at every level ofthe system. I say silence, but these people could still speak out if theymade that choice. Yeadon called them Ômoral cowardsÕ Ð ÔThis isabout your children and grandchildrenÕs lives and you have justbuggered o. and le it.Õ
ÔVariantÕ nonsense 
Some of his most powerful comments related to the allegedÔvariantsÕ being used to instil more fear, justify more lockdowns, andintroduce more ÔvaccinesÕ. He said government claims aboutÔvariantsÕ were nonsense. He had checked the alleged variant ÔcodesÕand they were 99.7 percent identical to the ÔoriginalÕ. This was thehuman identity di.erence equivalent to puand o. or wearing it the other way round. A 0.3 percent di.erencewould make it impossible for that ÔvariantÕ to escape immunity fromthe ÔoriginalÕ. This made no sense of having new ÔvaccinesÕ forÔvariantsÕ. He said there would have to be at least a 30 percent di.erence for that to be justiÞed and even then he believed theimmune system would still recognise what it was. Gates-fundedÔvariant modellerÕ and ÔvaccineÕ-pusher John Edmunds might care tocomment. Yeadon said drug companies were making new versionsof the ÔvaccineÕ as a Ôtop upÕ for ÔvariantsÕ. Worse than that, he said,the ÔregulatorsÕ around the world like the MHRA in the UK had gottogether and agreed that because ÔvaccinesÕ for ÔvariantsÕ were sosimilar to the Þrst ÔvaccinesÕ they did not have to do safety studies. Howtransparently sinister that is. This is when Yeadon said: ÔThere is aconspiracy here.Õ There was no need for another vaccine forÔvariantsÕ and yet we were told that there was and the country hadshut its borders because of them. ÔThey are going into hundreds ofmillions of arms without passing ÔgoÕ or any regulator. Why did theydo that? Why did they pick this method of making the vaccine?Õ
The reason had to be something bigger than that it seemed andÔitÕs not protection against the virusÕ. ItÕs was a far bigger project thatmeant politicians and advisers were willing to do things and not dothings that knowingly resulted in avoidable deaths Ð ÔthatÕs alreadyhappened when you think about lockdown and deprivation ofhealth care for a year.Õ He spoke of people prepared to do somethingthat results in the avoidable death of their fellow human beings andit not bother them. This is the penny-drop I have been working toget across for more than 30 years Ð the level of pure evil we aredealing with. Yeadon said his friends and associates could notbelieve there could be that much evil, but he reminded them ofStalin, Pol Pot and Hitler and of what Stalin had said: ÔOne death is atragedy. A million? A statistic.Õ He could not think of a benignexplanation for why you need top-up vaccines Ôwhich IÕm sure youdonÕtÕ and for the regulators Ôto just get out of the way and wavethem throughÕ. Why would the regulators do that when they werestill wrestling with the dangers of the ÔparentÕ vaccine? He wasclearly shocked by what he had seen since the ÔCovidÕ hoax beganand now he was thinking the previously unthinkable:
If you wanted to depopulate a significant proportion of the world and to do it in a way that doesnÕt involve destruction of the environment with nuclear weapons, poisoning everyone with anthrax or something like that, and you wanted plausible deniability while you had a multi-year infectious disease crisis, I actually donÕt think you could come up with a better plan of work than seems to be in front of me. I canÕt say thatÕs what they are going to do, but I canÕt think of a benign explanation why they are doing it. 
He said he never thought that they would get rid of 99 percent ofhumans, but now he wondered. ÔIf you wanted to that this would bea hell of a way to do it Ð it would be unstoppable folks.Õ Yeadon hadconcluded that those who submiaccineÕ would beallowed to have some kind of normal life (but for how long?) whilescrews were tightened to coerce and mandate the last few percent. ÔIthink theyÕll put the rest of them in a prison camp. I wish I waswrong, but I donÕt think I am.Õ Other points he made included: Therewere no coronavirus vaccines then suddenly they all come along atthe same time; we have no idea of the long term a.ect with trials soshort; coercing or forcing people to have medical procedures isagainst the Nuremberg Code instigated when the Nazis did just that;people should at least delay having the ÔvaccineÕ; a quick Internetsearch conÞrms that masks donÕt reduce respiratory viraltransmission and Ôthe government knows thatÕ; they have smashedcivil society and they know that, too; two dozen peer-reviewedstudies show no connection between lockdown and reducing deaths;he knew from personal friends the elite were still ßying around andgoing on holiday while the public were locked down; the elite werenot having the ÔvaccinesÕ. He was also asked if ÔvaccinesÕ could bemade to target di.erence races. He said he didnÕt know, but thedocument by the Project for the New American Century inSeptember, 2000, said developing Ôadvanced forms of biologicalwarfare that can target specific genotypes may transform biologicalwarfare from the realm of terror to a politically useful tool.Õ Oh,theyÕre evil all right. Of that we can be absolutely sure.
Another cull of old people 
We have seen from the CDC deÞnition that the mRNA ÔCovidvaccineÕ is not a vaccine and nor are the others that claim to reduceÔseverity of symptomsÕ in some people, but not protect from infectionor transmission. What about all the lies about returning to ÔnormalÕ ifpeople were ÔvaccinatedÕ? If they are not claimed to stop infectionand transmission of the alleged ÔvirusÕ, how does anything change?This was all lies to manipulate people to take the jabs and we areseeing that now with masks and distancing still required for theÔvaccinatedÕ. How did they think that elderly people with fragilehealth and immune responses were going to be a.ected by infusingtheir cells with synthetic material and other toxic substances? Theyknew that in the short and long term it would be devastating andfatal as the culling of the old that began with the Þrst lockdowns wascontinued with the ÔvaccineÕ. Death rates in care homes soaredimmediately residents began to be ÔvaccinatedÕ Ð infused withsynthetic material. Brave and commier nurses puttheir careers at risk by exposing this truth while the rest kept theirheads down and their mouths shut to put their careers before thosethey are supposed to care for. A long-time American CertiÞedNursing Assistant who gave his name as James posted a video inwhich he described emotionally what happened in his care homewhen vaccination began. He said that during 2020 very few residentswere sick with ÔCovidÕ and no one died during the entire year; butshortly aer the PÞzer mRNA injections 14 people died within twoweeks and many others were near death. ÔTheyÕre dropping likeßiesÕ, he said. Residents who walked on their own before the shotcould no longer and they had lost their ability to conduct anintelligent conversation. The homeÕs management said the suddendeaths were caused by a Ôsuper-spreaderÕ of ÔCovid-19Õ. Then howcome, James asked, that residents who refused to take the injectionswere not sick? It was a case of inject the elderly with mRNAsynthetic potions and blame their illness and death that followed onthe ÔvirusÕ. James described what was happening in care homes asÔthe greatest crime of genocide this country has ever seenÕ.Remember the NHS sta. nurse from earlier who used the sameword ÔgenocideÕ for what was happening with the ÔvaccinesÕ andthat it was an Ôact of human annihilationÕ. A UK care homewhistleblower told a similar story to James about the e.ect of theÔvaccineÕ in deaths and ÔoutbreaksÕ of illness dubbed ÔCovidÕ aergehad zealously imposed government regulations and no one wasallowed to even question the o.cial narrative let alone speak outagainst it. She said the NHS was even worse. Again we see theresults of reframing. A worker at a local care home where I live saidthey had not had a single case of ÔCovidÕ there for almost a year andwhen the residents were ÔvaccinatedÕ they had 19 positive cases intwo weeks with eight dying.
ItÕs not the ÔvaccineÕ Ð honest 
The obvious cause and e.ect was being ignored by the media andmost of the public. AustraliaÕs health minister Greg Hunt (a formerhead of strategy at the World Economic Forum) was admihospital aer he had the ÔvaccineÕ. He was su.ering according toreports from the skin infection ÔcellulitisÕ and it must have been asevere case to have warranted days in hospital. Immediately theauthorities said this was nothing to do with the ÔvaccineÕ when ane.ect of some vaccines is a Ôcellulitis-like reactionÕ. We had familiesof perfectly healthy old people who died aer the ÔvaccineÕ sayingthat if only they had been given the ÔvaccineÕ earlier they would stillbe alive. As a numbskull rating that is o. the chart. A father of fourÔdied of CovidÕ at aged 48 when he was taken ill two days aerhaving the ÔvaccineÕ. The man, a health administrator, had beenÔshielding during the pandemicÕ and had Ônot really le the houseÕuntil he went for the ÔvaccineÕ. Having the ÔvaccineÕ and then fallingill and dying does not seem to have qualiÞed as a possible cause ande.ect and ÔCovid-19Õ went on his death certiÞcate. His family saidthey had no idea how he Ôcaught the virusÕ. A family member said:ÔTragically, it could be that going for a vaccination ultimately led tohim catching Covid ÉThe sad truth is that they are never going toknow where it came from.Õ The family warned people to rememberthat the virus still existed and was Ôvery realÕ. So was their stupidity.Nurses and doctors who had the Þrst round of the ÔvaccineÕ werecollapsing, dying and ending up in a hospital bed while they or theirgrieving relatives were saying theyÕd still have the ÔvaccineÕ againdespite what happened. I kid you not. You mean if your husbandreturned from the dead heÕd have the same ÔvaccineÕ again that killedhim??
Doctors at the VCU Medical Center in Richmond, Virginia, saidthe Johnson & Johnson ÔvaccineÕ was to blame for a manÕs skinpeeling o.. Patient Richard Terrell said: ÔIt all just happened so fast.My skin peeled o.. ItÕs still coming o. on my hands now.Õ He said itwas stinging, burning and itching and when he bent his arms andlegs it was very painful with Ôthe skin swollen and rubbing againstitselfÕ. PÞzer/BioNTech and Moderna vaccines use mRNA to changethe cell while the Johnson & Johnson version uses DNA in a processsimilar to AstraZenecaÕs technique. Johnson & Johnson andAstraZeneca have both had their ÔvaccinesÕ paused by manycountries aer causing serious blood problems. TerrellÕs doctor FnuNutan said he could have died if he hadnÕt got medical asounds terrible so what did Nutan and Terrell say about the ÔvaccineÕnow? Oh, they still recommend that people have it. A nurse in ahospital bed 40 minutes aer the vaccination and unable to swallowdue to throat swelling was told by a doctor that he lost mobility inhis arm for 36 hours following the vaccination. What did he say tothe ailing nurse? ÔGood for you for geaccination.Õ We aredealing with a serious form of cognitive dissonance madness in bothpublic and medical sta.. There is a remarkable correlation betweenthose having the ÔvaccineÕ and trumpeting the fact and su.ering badhappenings shortly aerwards. Witold Rogiewicz, a Polish doctor,made a video of his ÔvaccinationÕ and ridiculed those who werequestioning its safety and the intentions of Bill Gates: ÔVaccinateyourself to protect yourself, your loved ones, friends and alsopatients. And to mention quickly I have info for anti-vaxxers andanti-Coviders if you want to contact Bill Gates you can do thisthrough me.Õ He further ridiculed the dangers of 5G. Days later hewas dead, but naturally the vaccination wasnÕt mentioned in theverdict of Ôheart a
Lies, lies and more lies 
So many members of the human race have slipped into extremestates of insanity and unfortunately they include reframed doctorsand nursing sta.. Having a ÔvaccineÕ and dying within minutes orhours is not considered a valid connection while death from anycause within 28 days or longer of a positive test with a test nottesting for the ÔvirusÕ means ÔCovid-19Õ goes on the death certiÞcate.How could that ÔvaccineÕ-death connection not have been madeexcept by calculated deceit? US Þgures in the initial rollout period toFebruary 12th, 2020, revealed that a third of the deaths reported tothe CDC aer ÔCovid vaccinesÕ happened within 48 hours. Five menin the UK su.ered an Ôextremely rareÕ blood clot problem aerhaving the AstraZeneca ÔvaccineÕ, but no causal link was establishedsaid the Gates-funded Medicines and Healthcare productsRegulatory Agency (MHRA) which had given the ÔvaccineÕemergency approval to be used. Former PÞzer executive Dr MichaelYeadon explained in his interview how the procedures could causeblood coagulation and clots. People who should have been at no riskwere dying from blood clots in the brain and he said he had heardfrom medical doctor friends that people were su.ering from skinbleeding and massive headaches. The AstraZeneca ÔshotÕ wasstopped by some 20 countries over the blood clothe corrupt MHRA, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and theWorld Health Organization said that it should continue to be giveneven though the EMA admideÞnitivelyÕ a link between blood cloaccineÕ. LaterMarco Cavaleri, head of EMA vaccine strategy, said there was indeeda clear link between the ÔvaccineÕ and thrombosis, but they didnÕtknow why. So much for the trials showing the ÔvaccineÕ is safe. Bloodclots were a.ecting younger people who would be under virtuallyno danger from ÔCovidÕ even if it existed which makes it all the morestupid and sinister.
The British government responded to public alarm by wheelingout June Raine, the terrifyingly weak infant school headmistresssound-alike who heads the UK MHRA drug ÔregulatorÕ. The ideathat she would stand up to Big Pharma and government pressure islaughable and she told us that all was well in the same way that shedid when allowing untested, never-used-on-humans-before,genetically-manipulating ÔvaccinesÕ to be exposed to the public in theÞrst place. Mass lying is the new normal of the ÔCovidÕ era. TheMHRA later said 30 cases of rare blood clots had by then beenconnected with the AstraZeneca ÔvaccineÕ (that means a lot more inreality) while stressing that the beneÞts of the jab in preventingÔCovid-19Õ outweighed any risks. A more ridiculous anddisingenuous statement with callous disregard for human health it ishard to contemplate. Immediately aer the mendacious Ôall-clearsÕtwo hospital workers in Denmark experienced blood clots andcerebral haemorrhaging following the AstraZeneca jab and one died.Top Norwegian health o.cial PŒl Andre Holme said the ÔvaccineÕwas the only common factor: ÔThere is nothing in the patient historyof these individuals that can give such a powerful immune responseÉ I am conÞdent that the antibodies that we have found are thecause, and I see no other explanation than it being the vaccine whichtriggers it.Õ Strokes, a clot or bleed in the brain, were clearlyassociated with the ÔvaccineÕ from word of mouth and whistleblowerreports. Similar consequences followed with all these ÔvaccinesÕ thatwe were told were so safe and as the numbers grew by the day itwas clear we were witnessing human carnage.
Learning the hard way 
A woman interviewed by UKColumn told how her husbandsu.ered dramatic health e.ects aer the vaccine when heÕd been ingood health all his life. He went from being a liell to losingall feeling in his legs and experiencing Ôexcruciating painÕ.Misdiagnosis followed twice at Accident and Emergency (anÔallergyÕ and ÔsciaticaÕ) before he was admiardwhere doctors said his serious condition had been caused by theÔvaccineÕ. Another seven ÔvaccinatedÕ people were apparently beingtreated on the same ward for similar symptoms. The woman said hehad the ÔvaccineÕ because they believed media claims that it was safe.ÔI didnÕt think the government would give out a vaccine that doesthis to somebody; I believed they would be bringing out avaccination that would be safe.Õ What a tragic way to learn thatlesson. Another woman posted that her husband was transportingstroke patients to hospital on almost every shi and when he askedthem if they had been ÔvaccinatedÕ for ÔCovidÕ they all replied ÔyesÕ.One had a Ômassive brain bleedÕ the day aer his second dose. Shesaid her husband reported the Ôjust been vaccinatedÕ informationevery time to doctors in A and E only for them to ignore it, make nonotes and appear annoyed that it was even mentioned. Thisparticular report cannot be veriÞed, but it expresses a commontheme that conÞrms the monumental underreporting of ÔvaccineÕconsequences. Interestingly as the ÔvaccinesÕ and their brain bloodclot/stroke consequences began to emerge the UK National HealthService began a publicity campaign telling the public what to do inthe event of a stroke. A Scoin March, 2021, said:
I have seen traumatic injuries from the vaccine, theyÕre not getting reported to the yellow card [adverse reaction] scheme, theyÕre treating the symptoms, not asking why, why itÕs happening. ItÕs just treating the symptoms and when you speak about it youÕre dismissed like youÕre crazy, IÕm not crazy, IÕm not crazy because every other colleague IÕve spoken to is terrified to speak out, theyÕve had enough. 
Videos appeared on the Internet of people uncontrollably shakingaer the ÔvaccineÕ with no control over muscles, limbs and even theirface. A Scoere rash all over her bodyalmost immediately aer she was given the AstraZeneca ÔvaccineÕ.The pictures were horriÞc. Leigh King, a 41-year-old hairdresserfrom Lanarkshire said: ÔNever in my life was I prepared for what Iwas about to experience É My skin was so sore and constantly hotÉ I have never felt pain like this ÉÕ But donÕt you worry, theÔvaccineÕ is perfectly safe. Then there has been the e.ect on medical
sta. who have been pressured to have the ÔvaccineÕ by psychopathicÔhealthÕ authorities and government. A London hospital consultantwho gave the name K. Polyakova wrote this to the British Medical Journal or BMJ:
I am currently struggling with É the failure to report the reality of the morbidity caused by our current vaccination program within the health service and staff population. The levels of sickness after vaccination is unprecedented and staff are getting very sick and some with neurological symptoms which is having a huge impact on the health service function. Even the young and healthy are off for days, some for weeks, and some requiring medical treatment. Whole teams are being taken out as they went to get vaccinated together. 
Mandatory vaccination in this instance is stupid, unethical and irresponsible when it comes to protecting our staff and public health. We are in the voluntary phase of vaccination, and encouraging staff to take an unlicensed product that is impacting on their immediate health É it is clearly stated that these vaccine products do not offer immunity or stop transmission. In which case why are we doing it? 
Not to protect health thatÕs for sure. Medical workers are lauded bygovernments for agenda reasons when they couldnÕt give a tossabout them any more than they can for the population in general.Schools across America faced the same situation as they closed dueto the high number of teachers and other sta. with bad reactions tothe PÞzer/BioNTech, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson ÔCovidvaccinesÕ all of which were linked to death and serious adversee.ects. The BMJ took down the consultantÕs comments prequickly on the grounds that they were being used to spreadÔdisinformationÕ. They were exposing the truth about the ÔvaccineÕwas the real reason. The cover-up is breathtaking.
Hiding the evidence 
The scale of the ÔvaccineÕ death cover-up worldwide can beconÞrmed by comparing o.cial Þgures with the personal experienceof the public. I heard of many people in my community who diedimmediately or soon aer the vaccine that would never appear in themedia or even likely on the o.cial totals of ÔvaccineÕ fatalities andadverse reactions when only about ten percent are estimated to bereported and I have seen some estimates as low as one percent in aHarvard study. In the UK alone by April 29th, 2021, some 757,654adverse reactions had been o.cially reported from thePÞzer/BioNTech, Oxford/AstraZeneca and Moderna ÔvaccinesÕ withmore than a thousand deaths linked to jabs and that means anestimated ten times this number in reality from a ten percentreporting rate percentage. ThatÕs seven million adverse reactions and10,000 potential deaths and a one percent reporting rate would beten times those Þgures. In 1976 the US government pulled the swineßu vaccine aer 53 deaths. The UK data included a combined 10,000eye disorders from the ÔCovid vaccinesÕ with more than 750 su.eringvisual impairment or blindness and again multiply by the estimatedreporting percentages. As ÔCovid casesÕ o.cially fell hospitalsvirtually empty during the ÔCovid crisisÕ began to Þll up with arange of other problems in the wake of the ÔvaccineÕ rollout. Thenumbers across America have also been catastrophic. Deaths linkedto all types of vaccine increased by 6,000 percent in the Þrst quarter of2021 compared with 2020. A 39-year-old woman from Ogden, Utah,died four days aer receiving a second dose of ModernaÕs ÔCovidvaccineÕ when her liver, heart and kidneys all failed despite the factthat she had no known medical issues or conditions. Her familysought an autopsy, but Dr Erik Christensen, UtahÕs chief medicalexaminer, said proving vaccine injury as a cause of death almostnever happened. He could think of only one instance where anautopsy would name a vaccine as the o.cial cause of death and thatwould be anaphylaxis where someone received a vaccine and diedalmost instantaneously. ÔShort of that, it would be di.cult for us todeÞnitively say this is the vaccine,Õ Christensen said. If that is truethis must be added to the estimated ten percent (or far less)reporting rate of vaccine deaths and serious reactions and theconclusion can only be that vaccine deaths and serious reactions Ðincluding these ÔCovidÕ potionsÕ Ð are phenomenally understated ino.cial Þgures. The same story can be found everywhere. Endlessaccounts of deaths and serious reactions among the public, medicaland care home sta. while o.cial Þgures did not even begin toreßect this.
Professional script-reader Dr David Williams, a Ôtop public-healtho.cialÕ in Ontario, Canada, insulted our intelligence by claimingonly four serious adverse reactions and no deaths from the morethan 380,000 vaccine doses then given. This bore no resemblance towhat people knew had happened in their owns circles and we hadDirk Huyer in charge of geaccinated in Ontario whileat the same time he was Chief Coroner for the province investigatingcauses of death including possible death from the vaccine. An aidesaid he had stepped back from investigating deaths, but evidenceindicated otherwise. Rosemary Frei, who secured a Master of Sciencedegree in molecular biology at the Faculty of Medicine at CanadaÕsUniversity of Calgary before turning to investigative journalism, wasone who could see that o.cial Þgures for ÔvaccineÕ deaths andreactions made no sense. She said that doctors seldom reportedadverse events and when people got really sick or died aer gea vaccination they would avaccines. It had been that way for years and anyone who wonderedaloud whether the ÔCovid vaccinesÕ or other shots cause harm isimmediately branded as Ôanti-vaxÕ and Ôanti-scienceÕ. This wasÔcareer-threateningÕ for health professionals. Then there was thehuge pressure to support the push to ÔvaccinateÕ billions in thequickest time possible. Frei said:
So thatÕs where weÕre at today. More than half a million vaccine doses have been given to people in Ontario alone. The rush is on to vaccinate all 15 million of us in the province by September. And the mainstream media are screaming for this to be sped up even more. That all adds up to only a very slim likelihood that weÕre going to be told the truth by officials about how many people are getting sick or dying from the vaccines. 
What is true of Ontario is true of everywhere.
They KNEW Ð and still did it 
The authorities knew what was going to happen with multipledeaths and adverse reactions. The UK governmentÕs Gates-fundedand Big Pharma-dominated Medicines and Healthcare productsRegulatory Agency (MHRA) hired a company to employ AI incompiling the projected reactions to the ÔvaccineÕ that wouldotherwise be uncountable. The request for applications said: ÔTheMHRA urgently seeks an ArtiÞcial Intelligence (AI) soware tool toprocess the expected high volume of Covid-19 vaccine Adverse DrugReaction ÉÕ This was from the agency, headed by the disingenuousJune Raine, that gave the ÔvaccinesÕ emergency approval and thecompany was hired before the Þrst shot was given. ÔWe are going tokill and maim you Ð is that okay?Õ ÔOh, yes, perfectly Þne Ð IÕm verygrateful, thank you, doctor.Õ The range of ÔCovid vaccineÕ adversereactions goes on for page aer page in the MHRA criminallyunderreported ÔYellow CardÕ system and includes a.ects to eyes,ears, skin, digestion, blood and so on. RaineÕs MHRA amazinglyclaimed that the Ôoverall safety experience É is so far as expectedfrom the clinical trialsÕ. The death, serious adverse e.ects, deafnessand blindness were expected? When did they ever mention that? Ifthese human tragedies were expected then those that gave approvalfor the use of these ÔvaccinesÕ must be guilty of crimes againsthumanity including murder Ð a deÞnition of which is Ôkilling aperson with malice aforethought or with recklessness manifestingextreme indi.erence to the value of human life.Õ People involved atthe MHRA, the CDC in America and their equivalent around theworld must go before Nuremberg trials to answer for their callousinhumanity. We are only talking here about the immediate e.ects ofthe ÔvaccineÕ. The longer-term impact of the DNA syntheticmanipulation is the main reason they are so hysterically desperate toinoculate the entire global population in the shortest possible time.
Africa and the developing world are a major focus for the ÔvaccineÕdepopulation agenda and a mass vaccination sales-pitch isunderway thanks to caring people like the Rockefellers and otherCult assets. The Rockefeller Foundation, which pre-empted theÔCovid pandemicÕ in a document published in 2010 that ÔpredictedÕwhat happened a decade later, announced an initial $34.95 milliongrant in February, 2021, Ôto ensure more equitable access to Covid-19testing and vaccinesÕ among other things in Africa in collaborationwith Ô24 organizations, businesses, and government agenciesÕ. Thepan-Africa initiative would focus on 10 countries: Burkina Faso,Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa, Tanzania,Uganda, and ZambiaÕ. Rajiv Shah, President of the RockefellerFoundation and former administrator of CIA-controlled USAID, saidthat if Africa was not mass-vaccinated (to change the DNA of itspeople) it was a Ôthreat to all of humanityÕ and not fair on Africans.When someone from the Rockefeller Foundation says they want todo something to help poor and deprived people and countries it istime for a belly-laugh. They are doing this out of the goodness oftheir ÔheartÕ because ÔvaccinatingÕ the entire global population iswhat the ÔCovidÕ hoax set out to achieve. O.cial ÔdecolonisationÕ ofAfrica by the Cult was merely a prelude to Þnancial colonisation onthe road to a return to physical colonisation. The ÔvaccineÕ is vital tothat and the sudden and convenient death of the ÔCovidÕ scepticpresident of Tanzania can be seen in its true light. A lot of people inAfrica are aware that this is another form of colonisation andexploitation and they need to stand their ground.
The Ôvaccine is workingÕ scam 
A potential problem for the Cult was that the ÔvaccineÕ is meant tochange human DNA and body messaging and not to protect anyonefrom a ÔvirusÕ never shown to exist. The vaccine couldnÕt workbecause it was not designed to work and how could they make itappear to be working so that more people would have it? This wasovercome by lowering the ampliÞcation rate of the PCR test toproduce fewer ÔcasesÕ and therefore fewer ÔdeathsÕ. Some of us hadbeen pointing out since March, 2020, that the ampliÞcation rate ofthe test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ had been made artiÞcially high togenerate positive tests which they could call ÔcasesÕ to justifylockdowns. The World Health Organization recommended anabsurdly high 45 ampliÞcation cycles to ensure the high positivesrequired by the Cult and then remained silent on the issue untilJanuary 20th, 2021 Ð BidenÕs Inauguration Day. This was when theÔvaccinationsÕ were seriously underway and on that day the WHOrecommended aer discussions with AmericaÕs CDC thatlaboratories lowered their testing amplification. Dr David Samadi, acertiÞed urologist and health writer, said the WHO was encouragingall labs to reduce their cycle count for PCR tests. He said the currentcycle was much too high and was Ôresulting in any particle beingdeclared a positive caseÕ. Even one mainstream news report I sawsaid this meant the number of ÔCovidÕ infections may have beenÔdramatically inßatedÕ. Oh, just a liissued new guidance to laboratories in April, 2021, to use 28 cyclesbut only for ÔvaccinatedÕ people. The timing of the CDC/WHOinterventions were cynically designed to make it appear theÔvaccinesÕ were responsible for falling cases and deaths when the realreason can be seen in the following examples. New YorkÕs state lab,the Wadsworth Center, identiÞed 872 positive tests in July, 2020,based on a threshold of 40 cycles. When the Þgure was lowered to 35cycles 43 percent of the 872 were no longer ÔpositivesÕ. At 30 cyclesthe Þgure was 63 percent. A Massachuseeen85 to 90 percent of people who tested positive in July with a cyclethreshold of 40 would be negative at 30 cycles, Ashish Jha, MD,director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, said: ÔIÕm reallyshocked that it could be that high É Boy, does it really change theway we need to be thinking about testing.Õ IÕm shocked that I couldsee the obvious in the spring of 2020, with no medical background,and most medical professionals still havenÕt worked it out. No, thatÕsnot shocking Ð itÕs terrifying.
Three weeks aer the WHO directive to lower PCR cycles theLondon Daily Mail ran this headline: ÔWhy ARE Covid casesplummeting? New infections have fallen 45% in the US and 30%globally in the past 3 weeks but experts say vaccine is NOT the maindriver because only 8% of Americans and 13% of people worldwidehave received their Þrst dose.Õ They acknowledged that the dropcould not be aaccineÕ, but soon this morphedthroughout the media into the ÔvaccineÕ has caused cases and deathsto fall when it was the PCR threshold. In December, 2020, there waschaos at English Channel ports with truck drivers needing negativeÔCovidÕ tests before they could board a ferry home for Christmas.The government wanted to remove the backlog as fast as possibleand they brought in troops to do the ÔtestingÕ. Out of 1,600 driversjust 36 tested positive and the rest were given the all clear to crossthe Channel. I guess the authorities thought that 36 was the leastthey could get away with without the unquestioning catching on.The ampliÞcation trick which most people believed in the absence ofinformation in the mainstream applied more pressure on thoserefusing the ÔvaccineÕ to succumb when it Ôobviously workedÕ. Thetruth was the exact opposite with deaths in care homes soaring withthe ÔvaccineÕ and in Israel the term used was ÔskyrocketÕ. A re.analysis of published data from the Israeli Health Ministry led by DrHervŽ Seligmann at the Medicine Emerging Infectious and TropicalDiseases at Aix-Marseille University found that PÞzerÕs ÔCovidvaccineÕ killed Ôabout 40 times more [elderly] people than the diseaseitself would have killedÕ during a Þve-week vaccination period and260 times more younger people than would have died from theÔvirusÕ even according to the manipulated ÔvirusÕ Þgures. DrSeligmann and his co-study author, Haim Yativ, declared aerreviewing the Israeli ÔvaccineÕ death data: ÔThis is a new Holocaust.Õ
Then, in mid-April, 2021, aer vast numbers of people worldwidehad been ÔvaccinatedÕ, the story changed with clear coordination.The UK government began to prepare the ground for more futurelockdowns when Nuremberg-destined Boris Johnson told yetanother whopper. He said that cases had fallen because of lockdowns not ÔvaccinesÕ. Lockdowns are irrelevant when there is no ÔvirusÕ andthe test and fraudulent death certiÞcates are deciding the number ofÔcasesÕ and ÔdeathsÕ. Study aer study has shown that lockdownsdonÕt work and instead kill and psychologically destroy people.Meanwhile in the United States Anthony Fauci and RochelleWalensky, the ultra-Zionist head of the CDC, peddled the same line.More lockdown was the answer and not the ÔvaccineÕ, a line repeatedon cue by the moron that is Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau.Why all the hysteria to get everyone ÔvaccinatedÕ if lockdowns andnot ÔvaccinesÕ made the di.erence? None of it makes sense on theface of it. Oh, but it does. The Cult wants lockdowns and theÔvaccineÕ and if the ÔvaccineÕ is allowed to be seen as the total answerlockdowns would no longer be justiÞed when there are stilllivelihoods to destroy. ÔVariantsÕ and renewed upward manipulationof PCR ampliÞcation are planned to instigate never-endinglockdown and more ÔvaccinesÕ.
You must have it Ð weÕre desperate 
Israel, where the Jewish and Arab population are ruled by theSabbatian Cult, was the front-runner in imposing the DNA-manipulating ÔvaccineÕ on its people to such an extent that Jewishrefusers began to liken what was happening to the early years ofNazi Germany. This would seem to be a fantastic claim. Why woulda government of Jewish people be acting like the Nazis did? If yourealise that the Sabbatian Cult was behind the Nazis and thatSabbatians hate Jews the pieces start to Þt and the question of why aÔJewishÕ government would treat Jews with such callous disregardfor their lives and freedom Þnds an answer. Those controlling thegovernment of Israel arenÕt Jewish Ð theyÕre Sabbatian. Israeli lawyerTamir Turgal was one who made the Nazi comparison in commentsto German lawyer Reiner Fuellmich who is leading a class actionlawsuit against the psychopaths for crimes against humanity. Turgaldescribed how the Israeli government was vaccinating children andpregnant women on the basis that there was no evidence that thiswas dangerous when they had no evidence that it wasnÕt dangerouseither. They just had no evidence. This was medical experimentationand Turgal said this breached the Nuremberg Code about medicalexperimentation and procedures requiring informed consent andchoice. Think about that. A Nuremberg Code developed because ofNazi experimentation on Jews and others in concentration camps bypeople like the evil-beyond-belief Josef Mengele is being breached bythe Israeli government; but when you know that itÕs a Sabbatian government along with its intelligence and military agencies likeMossad, Shin Bet and the Israeli Defense Forces, and that Sabbatianswere the force behind the Nazis, the kaleidoscope comes into focus.What have we come to when Israeli Jews are suing their governmentfor violating the Nuremberg Code by essentially making Israelissubject to a medical experiment using the controversial ÔvaccinesÕ?ItÕs a shocker that this has to be done in the light of what happenedin Nazi Germany. The Anshe Ha-Emet, or ÔPeople of the TruthÕ,made up of Israeli doctors, lawyers, campaigners and public, havelaunched a lawsuit with the International Criminal Court. It says:
When the heads of the Ministry of Health as well as the prime minister presented the vaccine in Israel and began the vaccination of Israeli residents, the vaccinated were not advised, that, in practice, they are taking part in a medical experiment and that their consent is required for this under the Nuremberg Code. 
The irony is unbelievable, but easily explained in one word:Sabbatians. The foundation of Israeli ÔCovidÕ apartheid is the ÔgreenpassÕ or Ôgreen passportÕ which allows Jews and Arabs who havehad the DNA-manipulating ÔvaccineÕ to go about their lives Ð towork, ßy, travel in general, go to shopping malls, bars, restaurants,hotels, concerts, gyms, swimming pools, theatres and sports venues,while non-ÕvaccinatedÕ are banned from all those places andactivities. Israelis have likened the Ôgreen passÕ to the yellow starsthat Jews in Nazi Germany were forced to wear Ð the same as theyellow stickers that a branch of UK supermarket chain Morrisonstold exempt mask-wears they had to display when shopping. Howvery sensitive. The Israeli system is blatant South African-styleapartheid on the basis of compliance or non-compliance to fascismrather than colour of the skin. How appropriate that the SabbatianIsraeli government was so close to the pre-Mandela apartheidregime in Pretoria. The Sabbatian-instigated Ôvaccine passportÕ inIsrael is planned for everywhere. Sabbatians struck a deal withPÞzer that allowed them to lead the way in the percentage of anational population infused with synthetic material and the resultwas catastrophic. Israeli freedom activist Shai Dannon told me howchairs were appearing on beaches that said Ôvaccinated onlyÕ. HealthMinister Yuli Edelstein said that anyone unwilling or unable to getthe jabs that Ôconfer immunityÕ will be Ôle behindÕ. The manÕs a liar.Not even the makers claim the ÔvaccinesÕ confer immunity. Whenyou see those Þgures of ÔvaccineÕ deaths these psychopaths weresaying that you must take the chance the ÔvaccineÕ will kill you ormaim you while knowing it will change your DNA or lockdown foryou will be permanent. ThatÕs fascism. The Israeli parliament passeda law to allow personal information of the non-vaccinated to beshared with local and national authorities for three months. This wasclaimed by its supporters to be a way to ÔencourageÕ people to bevaccinated. Hadas Ziv from Physicians for Human Rights describedthis as a Ôdraconian law which crushed medical ethics and thepatient rightsÕ. But thatÕs the idea, the Sabbatians would reply.
Your papers, please 
Sabbatian Israel was leading what has been planned all along to be aglobal Ôvaccine passÕ called a Ôgreen passportÕ without which youwould remain in permanent lockdown restriction and unable to doanything. This is how badly Ð desperately Ð the Cult is to get everyoneÔvaccinatedÕ. The term and colour ÔgreenÕ was not by chance andrelated to the psychology of fusing the perception of the greenclimate hoax with the ÔCovidÕ hoax and how the ÔsolutionÕ to both isthe same Great Reset. Lying politicians, health o.cials andpsychologists denied there were any plans for mandatoryvaccinations or restrictions based on vaccinations, but they knewthat was exactly what was meant to happen with governments of allcountries reaching agreements to enforce a global system. ÔFreeÕDenmark and ÔfreeÕ Sweden unveiled digital vaccine certiÞcation.Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy,Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, and Spain have all commivaccine passport system and the rest including the whole of the EUwould follow. The satanic UK government will certainly go this waydespite mendacious denials and at the time of writing it is trying tomanipulate the public into having the ÔvaccineÕ so they could goabroad on a summer holiday. How would that work withoutsomething to prove you had the synthetic toxicity injected into you?
Documents show that the EUÕs European Commission was movingtowards Ôvaccine certiÞcatesÕ in 2018 and 2019 before the ÔCovidÕhoax began. They knew what was coming. Abracadabra Ð Ursulavon der Leyen, the German President of the Commission,announced in March, 2021, an EU ÔDigital Green CertiÞcateÕ Ð greenagain Ð to track the publicÕs ÔCovid statusÕ. The passport sting isworldwide and the Far East followed the same paKorea ruling that only those with ÔvaccinationÕ passports Ð again thegreen pass Ð would be able to Ôreturn to their daily livesÕ.
Bill Gates has been preparing for this ÔpassportÕ with other Cultoperatives for years and beyond the paper version is a Gates-fundedÔdigital taaccinated and who hasnÕt.The Ôtareadable to conÞrm who has been vaccinated. This is a bio-luminouslight-generating enzyme (think Þreßies) called É Luciferase. Yes,named aer the Cult ÔgodÕ Lucifer the Ôlight bringerÕ of whom moreto come. Gates said he funded the readable tain the developing world were vaccinated and no one was missed out.He cares so much about poor kids as we know. This was just thecover story to develop a vaccine tagging system for everyone on theplanet. Gates has been funding the ID2020 ÔallianceÕ to do just that inleague with other lovely people at Microso, GAVI, the RockefellerFoundation, Accenture and IDEO.org. He said in interviews inMarch, 2020, before any ÔvaccineÕ publicly existed, that the worldmust have a globalised digital certiÞcate to track the ÔvirusÕ and whohad been vaccinated. Gates knew from the start that the mRNAvaccines were coming and when they would come and that the planwas to tag the ÔvaccinatedÕ to marginalise the intelligent and stopthem doing anything including travel. Evil just doesnÕt su.ce. Gateswas exposed for o.ering a $10 million bribe to the Nigerian Houseof Representatives to invoke compulsory ÔCovidÕ vaccination of allNigerians. Sara Cunial, a member of the Italian Parliament, calledGates a Ôvaccine criminalÕ. She urged the Italian President to handhim over to the International Criminal Court for crimes againsthumanity and condemned his plans to Ôchip the human raceÕthrough ID2020.
You know itÕs a long-planned agenda when war criminal and Cultgofer Tony Blair is on the case. With the scale of arrogance onlysomeone as dark as Blair can muster he said: ÔVaccination in the endis going to be your route to liberty.Õ Blair is a disgusting piece ofwork and he conÞrms that again. The media has given a lot ofcoverage to a bloke called Charlie Mullins, founder of LondonÕsbiggest independent plumbing company, Pimlico Plumbers, who hassaid he wonÕt employ anyone who has not been vaccinated or havethem go to any home where people are not vaccinated. He said thatif he had his way no one would be allowed to walk the streets if theyhave not been vaccinated. Gates was cheering at the time while I wasalerting the white coats. The plan is that people will qualify forÔpassportsÕ for having the Þrst two doses and then to keep it theywill have to have all the follow ups and new ones for inventedÔvariantsÕ until human genetics is transformed and many are deadwho canÕt adjust to the changes. Hollywood celebrities Ð the usualpropaganda stunt Ð are promoting something called the WELLHealth-Safety Rating to verify that a building or space has Ôtaken thenecessary steps to prioritize the health and safety of their sta.,visitors and other stakeholdersÕ. They included Lady Gaga, JenniferLopez, Michael B. Jordan, Robert DeNiro, Venus Williams, WolfgangPuck, Deepak Chopra and 17th Surgeon General Richard Carmona.Yawn. WELL Health-Safety has big connections with China. Parentcompany Delos is headed by former Goldman Sachs partner PaulScialla. This is another example Ð and we will see so many others Ðof using the excuse of ÔhealthÕ to dictate the lives and activities of thepopulation. I guess one conÞrmation of the ÔsafetyÕ of buildings isthat only ÔvaccinatedÕ people can go in, right?

Electronic concentration camps 
I wrote decades ago about the plans to restrict travel and here we arefor those who refuse to bow to tyranny. This can be achieved in onego with air travel if the aviation industry makes a blanket decree.
The ÔvaccineÕ and guaranteed income are designed to be part of aglobal version of ChinaÕs social credit system which tracks behaviour24/7 and awards or deletes ÔcreditsÕ based on whether yourbehaviour is supported by the state or not. I mean your entirelifestyle Ð what you do, eat, say, everything. Once your credit scorefalls below a certain level consequences kick in. In China tens ofmillions have been denied travel by air and train because of this. Allthe locations and activities denied to refusers by the ÔvaccineÕpassports will be included in one big mass ban on doing almostanything for those that donÕt bow their head to government. ItÕsbeyond fascist and a new term is required to describe its extremes Ð Iguess fascist technocracy will have to do. The way the Chinesesystem of technological Ð technocratic Ð control is sweeping the Westcan be seen in the Los Angeles school system and is planned to beexpanded worldwide. Every child is required to have a ÔCovidÕ.tracking app scanned daily before they can enter the classroom. Theso-called Daily Pass tracking system is produced by GatesÕ Microsowhich IÕm sure will shock you rigid. The pass will be scanned usinga barcode (one step from an inside-the-body barcode) and theinformation will include health checks, ÔCovidÕ tests andvaccinations. Entry codes are for one speciÞc building only andaccess will only be allowed if a student or teacher has a negative testwith a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ, has no symptoms of anythingalleged to be related to ÔCovidÕ (symptoms from a range of otherillness), and has a temperature under 100 degrees. No barcode, noentry, is planned to be the case for everywhere and not only schools.
Kids are being psychologically prepared to accept this as ÔnormalÕtheir whole life which is why what they can impose in schools is soimportant to the Cult and its gofers. Long-time American freedomcampaigner John Whitehead of the Rutherford Institute was notexaggerating when he said: ÔDatabit by databit, we are building ourown electronic concentration camps.Õ Canada under its Cult goferprime minister Justin Trudeau has taken a major step towards thereal thing with people interned against their will if they test positivewith a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ when they arrive at a Canadianairport. They are jailed in internment hotels oen without food orwater for long periods and with many doors failing to lock therehave been sexual assaults. The interned are being chargedsometimes $2,000 for the privilege of being abused in this way.Trudeau is fully on board with the Cult and says the ÔCovidpandemicÕ has provided an opportunity for a global ÔresetÕ topermanently change Western civilisation. His number two, DeputyPrime Minister Chrystia Freeland, is a trustee of the World EconomicForum and a Rhodes Scholar. The Trudeau family have long beenservants of the Cult. See The Biggest Secret and Cathy OÕBrienÕs bookTrance-Formation of America for the horriÞc background to TrudeauÕsfather Pierre Trudeau another Canadian prime minister. Hide yourfascism behind the faade of a heart-on-the-sleeve liberal. ItÕs a well-honed Cult technique.
What can the ÔvaccineÕ really do? 
We have a ÔvirusÕ never shown to exist and ÔvariantsÕ of the ÔvirusÕthat have also never been shown to exist except, like the ÔoriginalÕ, ascomputer-generated Þctions. Even if you believe thereÕs a ÔvirusÕ theÔcaseÕ to ÔdeathÕ rate is in the region of 0.23 to 0.15 percent and thoseÔdeathsÕ are concentrated among the very old around the sameaverage age that people die anyway. In response to this lack of threat(in truth none) psychopaths and idiots, knowingly and unknowinglyanswering to Gates and the Cult, are seeking to ÔvaccinateÕ everyman, woman and child on Planet Earth. Clearly the ÔvaccineÕ is notabout ÔCovidÕ Ð none of this ever has been. So what is it all aboutreally? Why the desperation to infuse genetically-manipulatingsynthetic material into everyone through mRNA fraudulentÔvaccinesÕ with the intent of doing this over and over with theexcuses of ÔvariantsÕ and other ÔvirusÕ inventions? Dr SherriTenpenny, an osteopathic medical doctor in the United States, hasmade herself an expert on vaccines and their e.ects as a vehementcampaigner against their use. Tenpenny was board certiÞed inemergency medicine, the director of a level two trauma centre for 12years, and moved to Cleveland in 1996 to start an integrativemedicine practice which has treated patients from all 50 states andsome 17 other countries. Weaning people o. pharmaceutical drugs isa speciality.
She became interested in the consequences of vaccines aeraaccine Information Center inWashington DC in 2000 where she Ôsat through four days of listeningto medical doctors and scientists and lawyers and parents of vaccineinjured kidsÕ and asked: ÔWhatÕs going on?Õ She had never beenvaccinated and never got ill while her father was given a list ofvaccines to be in the military and was Ôsick his entire lifeÕ. Theexperience added to her questions and she began to examine vaccinedocuments from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Aerreading the Þrst one, the 1998 version of The General Recommendations of Vaccination, she thought: ÔThis is it?Õ The document was poorlywrienpenny began 20 years of researchinto vaccines that continues to this day. She began her research intoÔCovid vaccinesÕ in March, 2020, and she describes them as ÔdeadlyÕ.For many, as we have seen, they already have been. Tenpenny saidthat in the Þrst 30 days of the ÔvaccineÕ rollout in the United Statesthere had been more than 40,000 adverse events reported to thevaccine adverse event database. A document had been delivered toher the day before that was 172 pages long. ÔWe have over 40,000adverse events; we have over 3,100 cases of [potentially deadly]anaphylactic shock; we have over 5,000 neurological reactions.ÕE.ects ranged from headaches to numbness, dizziness and vertigo,to losing feeling in hands or feet and paraesthesia which is whenlimbs Ôfall asleepÕ and people have the sensation of insects crawlingunderneath their skin. All this happened in the Þrst 30 days andremember that only about ten percent (or far less) of adverse reactionsand vaccine-related deaths are estimated to be o.cially reported.Tenpenny said:
So can you think of one single product in any industry, any industry, for as long as products have been made on the planet that within 30 days we have 40,000 people complaining of side effects that not only is still on the market but É weÕve got paid actors telling us how great they are for getting their vaccine. WeÕre offering people $500 if they will just get their vaccine and weÕve got nurses and doctors going; ÔI got the vaccine, I got the vaccineÕ. 
Tenpenny said they were not going to be Ôhappy dancing folksÕwhen they began to su.er BellÕs palsy (facial paralysis),neuropathies, cardiac arrhythmias and autoimmune reactions thatkill through a blood disorder. ÔTheyÕre not going to be so happy,happy then, but weÕre never going to see pictures of those peopleÕshe said. Tenpenny described the ÔvaccineÕ as Ôa well-designed killingtoolÕ.
No off-switch 
Bad as the initial consequences had been Tenpenny said it would bemaybe 14 months before we began to see the Ôfull ravageÕ of what isgoing to happen to the ÔCovid vaccinatedÕ with full-outconsequences taking anything between two years and 20 years toshow. You can understand why when you consider that variations ofthe ÔCovid vaccineÕ use mRNA (messenger RNA) to in theoryactivate the immune system to produce protective antibodieswithout using the actual ÔvirusÕ. How can they when itÕs a computerprogram and theyÕve never isolated what they claim is the ÔrealthingÕ? Instead they use synthetic mRNA. They are inoculatingsynthetic material into the body which through a technique knownas the Trojan horse is absorbed into cells to change the nature ofDNA. Human DNA is changed by an infusion of messenger RNAand with each new ÔvaccineÕ of this type it is changed even more. Sayso and you are banned by Cult Internet platforms. The contempt thecontemptuous Mark Zuckerberg has for the truth and human healthcan be seen in an internal Facebook video leaked to the ProjectVeritas investigative team in which he said of the ÔCovid vaccinesÕ:ÔÉ I share some caution on this because we just donÕt know the longterm side-e.ects of basically modifying peopleÕs DNA and RNA.Õ Atthe same time this disgusting manÕs Facebook was censoring andbanning anyone saying exactly the same. He must go before aNuremberg trial for crimes against humanity when he knows that heis censoring legitimate concerns and denying the right of informedconsent on behalf of the Cult that owns him. People have been killedand damaged by the very ÔvaccinationÕ technique he cast doubt onhimself when they may not have had the ÔvaccineÕ with access toinformation that he denied them. The plan is to have at least annualÔCovid vaccinationsÕ, add others to deal with invented ÔvariantsÕ, andchange all other vaccines into the mRNA system. PÞzer executivestold shareholders at a virtual Barclays Global Healthcare Conferencein March, 2021, that the public may need a third dose of ÔCovidvaccineÕ, plus regular yearly boosters and the company planned tohike prices to milk the proÞts in a ÔsigniÞcant opportunity for ourvaccineÕ. These are the professional liars, cheats and opportunistswho are telling you their ÔvaccineÕ is safe. Given this volume ofmRNA planned to be infused into the human body and its ability tothen replicate we will have a transformation of human genetics frombiological to synthetic biological Ð exactly the long-time Cult plan forreasons weÕll see Ð and many will die. Sherri Tenpenny said of thisreplication:
ItÕs like having an on-button but no off-button and that whole mechanism É they actually give it a name and they call it the Trojan horse mechanism, because it allows that [synthetic] virus and that piece of that [synthetic] virus to get inside of your cells, start to replicate and even get inserted into other parts of your DNA as a Trojan-horse. 
Ask the overwhelming majority of people who have the ÔvaccineÕwhat they know about the contents and what they do and theywould reply: ÔThe government says it will stop me geGovernments give that false impression on purpose to increase take-up. You can read Sherri TenpennyÕs detailed analysis of the healthconsequences in her blog at Vaxxter.com, but in summary these aresome of them. She highlights the statement by Bill Gates about howhuman beings can become their own Ôvaccine manufacturingmachineÕ. The man is insane. [ÔVaccineÕ-generated] ÔantibodiesÕ carrysynthetic messenger RNA into the cells and the damage starts,Tenpenny contends, and she says that lungs can be adverselya.ected through varying degrees of pus and bleeding whichobviously a.ects breathing and would be dubbed ÔCovid-19Õ. Evenmore sinister was the impact of ÔantibodiesÕ on macrophages, a whiteblood cell of the immune system. They consist of Type 1 and Type 2which have very di.erent functions. She said Type 1 are Ôhyper.vigilantÕ white blood cells which Ôgobble upÕ bacteria etc. However,in doing so, this could cause inßammation and in extremecircumstances be fatal. She says these a.ects are mitigated by Type 2macrophages which kick in to calm down the system and stop itgoing rogue. They clear up dead tissue debris and reduceinßammation that the Type 1 ÔÞre crewsÕ have caused. Type 1 killsthe infection and Type 2 heals the damage, she says. This is herpunchline with regard to ÔCovid vaccinationsÕ: She says that mRNAÔantibodiesÕ block Type 2 macrophages by adeactivating them. This meant that when the Type 1 response wastriggered by infection there was nothing to stop that gehand by calming everything down. ThereÕs an on-switch, but no o.-switch, she says. What follows can be Ôover and out, see you when Isee youÕ.
Genetic suicide 
Tenpenny also highlights the potential for autoimmune disease Ð thebody aaccines sincethey Þrst appeared. Infusing a synthetic foreign substance into cellscould cause the immune system to react in a panic believing that thebody is being overwhelmed by an invader (it is) and theconsequences can again be fatal. There is an autoimmune responseknown as a Ôcytokine stormÕ which I have likened to a homeownerpanicked by an intruder and picking up a gun to shoot randomly inall directions before turning the Þre on himself. The immune systemunleashes a storm of inßammatory response called cytokines to athreat and the body commits hara-kiri. The lesson is that you messwith the bodyÕs immune response at your peril and these ÔvaccinesÕseriously Ð fundamentally Ð mess with immune response. Tenpennyrefers to a consequence called anaphylactic shock which is a severeand highly dangerous allergic reaction when the immune systemßoods the body with chemicals. She gives the example of having abee sting which primes the immune system and makes it sensitive tothose chemicals. When people are stung again maybe years later theimmune response can be so powerful that it leads to anaphylacticshock. Tenpenny relates this ÔshockÕ with regard to the ÔCovidvaccineÕ to something called polyethylene glycol or PEG. Enormousnumbers of people have become sensitive to this over decades of usein a whole range of products and processes including food, drink,skin creams and ÔmedicineÕ. Studies have claimed that some 72percent of people have antibodies triggered by PEG compared withtwo percent in the 1960s and allergic hypersensitive reactions to thisbecome a gathering cause for concern. Tenpenny points out that theÔmRNA vaccineÕ is coated in a ÔbubbleÕ of polyethylene glycol whichhas the potential to cause anaphylactic shock through immunesensitivity. Many reports have appeared of people reacting this wayaer having the ÔCovid vaccineÕ. What do we think is going tohappen as humanity has more and more of these ÔvaccinesÕ?Tenpenny said: ÔAll these pictures we have seen with people withthese rashes É these weepy rashes, big reactions on their arms andthings like that Ð itÕs an acute allergic reaction most likely to thepolyethylene glycol that youÕve been previously primed andsensitised to.Õ
Those who have not studied the conspiracy and its perpetrators atlength might think that making the population sensitive to PEG andthen puaccinesÕ is just a coincidence. It is not. It isinstead testament to how carefully and coldly-planned currentevents have been and the scale of the conspiracy we are dealingwith. Tenpenny further explains that the ÔvaccineÕ mRNA procedurecan breach the blood-brain barrier which protects the brain fromtoxins and other crap that will cause malfunction. In this case theycould make two proteins corrupt brain function to causeAmyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , a progressive nervous systemdisease leading to loss of muscle control, and frontal lobedegeneration Ð AlzheimerÕs and dementia. Immunologist J. BartClasson published a paper connecting mRNA ÔvaccinesÕ to priondisease which can lead to AlzheimerÕs and other forms ofneurogenerative disease while others have pointed out the potentialto a.ect the placenta in ways that make women infertile. This willbecome highly signiÞcant in the next chapter when I will discussother aspects of this non-vaccine that relate to its nanotechnologyand transmission from the injected to the uninjected.
Qualified in idiocy 
Tenpenny describes how research has conÞrmed that these ÔvaccineÕ.generated antibodies can interact with a range of other tissues in thebody and athat if you have a hundred people standing in front of you that allgot this shot they could have a hundred di.erent symptoms.ÕAnyone really think that Cult gofers like the Queen, Tony Blair,Christopher Whi, Anthony Fauci, and all the other psychopathshave really had this ÔvaccineÕ in the pictures weÕve seen? Not abloody chance. Why donÕt doctors all tell us about all these dangersand consequences of the ÔCovid vaccineÕ? Why instead do theyencourage and pressure patients to have the shot? DonÕt letÕs thinkfor a moment that doctors and medical sta. canÕt be stupid, lazy, andpsychopathic and thatÕs without the Þnancial incentives to give thejab. Tenpenny again:
Some people are going to die from the vaccine directly but a large number of people are going to start to get horribly sick and get all kinds of autoimmune diseases 42 days to maybe a year out. What are they going to do, these stupid doctors who say; ÔGood for you for getting that vaccine.Õ What are they going to say; ÔOh, it must be a mutant, we need to give an extra dose of that vaccine.Õ 
Because now the vaccine, instead of one dose or two doses we need three or four because the stupid physicians arenÕt taking the time to learn anything about it. If I can learn this sitting in my living room reading a 19 page paper and several others so can they. ThereÕs nothing special about me, I just take the time to do it. 
Remember how Sara Kayat, the NHS and TV doctor, said that theÔCovid vaccineÕ would Ô100 percent prevent hospitalisation anddeathÕ. Doctors can be idiots like every other profession and theyshould not be worshipped as infallible. They are not and far from it.Behind many medical and scientiÞc ÔexpertsÕ lies an uninformed prattrying to hide themselves from you although in the ÔCovidÕ era manyhave failed to do so as with UK narrative-repeating ÔTV doctorÕHilary Jones. Pushing back against the minority of proper doctorsand scientists speaking out against the ÔvaccineÕ has been the entireediÞce of the Cult global state in the form of governments, medicalsystems, corporations, mainstream media, Silicon Valley, and anarmy of compliant doctors, medical sta. and scientists willing to sayanything for money and to enhance their careers by promoting theparty line. If you do that you are an ÔexpertÕ and if you wonÕt you arean Ôanti-vaxxerÕ and ÔCovidiotÕ. The pressure to be ÔvaccinatedÕ isincessant. We have even had reports claiming that the ÔvaccineÕ canhelp cure cancer and AlzheimerÕs and make the lame walk. I amwaiting for the announcement that it can bring you co.ee in themorning and cook your tea. Just as the symptoms of ÔCovidÕ seem toincrease by the week so have the miracles of the ÔvaccineÕ. Americansupermarket giant Kroger Co. o.ered nearly 500,000 employees in35 states a $100 bonus for having the ÔvaccineÕ while donut chainKrispy Kreme promised ÔvaccinatedÕ customers a free glazed donutevery day for the rest of 2021. Have your DNA changed and you willget a doughnut although we might not have to give you them forlong. Such o.ers and incentives conÞrm the desperation.
Perhaps the worse vaccine-stunt of them all was UK ÔHealthÕSecretary Mae TV aer watching a clip ofsomeone being ÔvaccinatedÕ when the roll-out began. Hancock fakedtears so badly it was embarrassing. Brain-of-Britain Piers Morgan,the lockdown-supporting, ÔvaccineÕ supporting, ÔvaccineÕ passport-supporting, TV host played along with Hancock Ð ÔYouÕre quiteemotional about thatÕ he said in response to acting so atrocious itwould have been called out at a school nativity which willpresumably today include Mary and Jesus in masks, wise menkeeping their camels six feet apart, and shepherds under tent arrest.System-serving Morgan tweeted this: ÔLove the idea of covid vaccinepassports for everywhere: ßights, restaurants, clubs, football, gyms,shops etc. ItÕs time covid-denying, anti-vaxxer loonies had theirbullsh*t blu. called & bar themselves from going anywhere thatresponsible citizens go.Õ If only I could aspire to his genius. To thinkthat Morgan, who specialises in shouting over anyone he disagreeswith, was lauded as a free speech hero when he lost his job aerstorming o. the set of his live show like a child throwing his dollyout of the pram. If he is a free speech hero we are in real trouble. Ihave no idea what Ôbullsh*tÕ means, by the way, the * throws mecompletely.
The Cult is desperate to infuse its synthetic DNA-changingconcoction into everyone and has been using every lie, trick andintimidation to do so. The question of ÔWhy?Õ we shall now address.
CHAPTER TEN 
Human 2.0 
I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and general 
educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to 
speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted Ð 
Alan Turing (1912-1954), the ÔFather of artificial intelligenceÔ 
Ihave been exposing for decades the plan to transform the humanbody from a biological to a synthetic-biological state. The newhuman that I will call Human 2.0 is planned to be connected toartiÞcial intelligence and a global AI ÔSmart GridÕ that would operateas one global system in which AI would control everything fromyour fridge to your heating system to your car to your mind.Humans would no longer be ÔhumanÕ, but post-human and sub.human, with their thinking and emotional processes replaced by AI.
What I said sounded crazy and beyond science Þction and I couldunderstand that. To any balanced, rational, mind it is crazy. Today,however, that world is becoming reality and it puts the ÔCovidvaccineÕ into its true context. Ray Kurzweil is the ultra-ZionistÔcomputer scientist, inventor and futuristÕ and co-founder of theSingularity University. Singularity refers to the merging of humanswith machines or ÔtranshumanismÕ. Kurzweil has said humanitywould be connected to the cyber ÔcloudÕ in the period of the ever-recurring year of 2030:
Our thinking É will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking É humans will be able to extend their limitations and Ôthink in the cloudÕ É WeÕre going to put gateways to the 
cloud in our brains ... WeÕre going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view, thatÕs the nature of being human Ð we transcend our limitations. As the technology becomes vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is still human gets smaller and smaller and smaller until itÕs just utterly negligible. 
They are trying to sell this end-of-humanity-as-we-know-it as thenext stage of ÔevolutionÕ when we become super-human and Ôlike thegodsÕ. They are lying to you. Shocked, eh? The population, and againespecially the young, have been manipulated into addiction totechnologies designed to enslave them for life. First they induced anaddiction to smartphones (holdables); next they moved totechnology on the body (wearables); and then began the invasion ofthe body (implantables). I warned way back about the plan formicrochipped people and we are now entering that era. We shouldnot be diverted into thinking that this refers only to chips we can see.Most important are the nanochips known as smart dust, neural dustand nanobots which are far too small to be seen by the human eye.Nanotechnology is everywhere, increasingly in food products, andreleased into the atmosphere by the geoengineering of the skiesfunded by Bill Gates to Ôshut out the SunÕ and Ôsave the planet fromglobal warmingÕ. Gates has been funding a project to spray millionsof tonnes of chalk (calcium carbonate) into the stratosphere overSweden to Ôdim the SunÕ and cool the Earth. Scientists warned themove could be disastrous for weather systems in ways no one canpredict and opposition led to the Swedish space agency announcingthat the ÔexperimentÕ would not be happening as planned in thesummer of 2021; but it shows where the Cult is going with dimmingthe impact of the Sun and thereÕs an associated plan to change theplanetÕs atmosphere. Who gives psychopath Gates the right todictate to the entire human race and dismantle planetary systems?The world will not be safe while this man is at large.
The global warming hoax has made the Sun, like the gas of life,something to fear when both are essential to good health and humansurvival (more inversion). The body transforms sunlight into vitalvitamin D through a process involving É cholesterol. This is thecholesterol we are also told to fear. We are urged to take Big Pharmastatin drugs to reduce cholesterol and itÕs all systematic. Reducingcholesterol means reducing vitamin D uptake with all the multiplehealth problems that will cause. At least if you take statins long termit saves the government from having to pay you a pension. Thedelivery system to block sunlight is widely referred to as chemtrailsalthough these have a much deeper agenda, too. They appear at Þrstto be contrails or condensation trails streaming from aircracold air at high altitudes. Contrails disperse very quickly whilechemtrails do not and spread out across the sky before eventuallytheir content falls to earth. Many times I have watched aircracross a clear blue sky releasing chemtrails until it looks like a cloudyday. Chemtrails contain many things harmful to humans and thenatural world including toxic heavy metals, aluminium (seeAlzheimerÕs) and nanotechnology. Ray Kurzweil reveals the reasonwithout actually saying so: ÔNanobots will infuse all the maaround us with information. Rocks, trees, everything will becomethese intelligent creatures.Õ How do you deliver that? From the sky.Self-replicating nanobots would connect everything to the SmartGrid. The phenomenon of Morgellons disease began in the chemtrailera and the correlation has led to it being dubbed the ÔchemtraildiseaseÕ. Self-replicating Þbres appear in the body that can be pulledout through the skin. Morgellons Þbres continue to grow outside thebody and have a form of artiÞcial intelligence. I cover this at greaterlength in Phantom Self.
ÔVaccineÕ operating system 
ÔCovid vaccinesÕ with their self-replicating synthetic material are alsodesigned to make the connection between humanity and KurzweilÕsÔcloudÕ. American doctor and dedicated campaigner for truth, CarrieMadej, an Internal Medicine Specialist in Georgia with more than 20years medical experience, has highlighted the nanotechnology aspectof the fake ÔvaccinesÕ. She explains how one of the components in atleast the Moderna and PÞzer synthetic potions are ÔlipidnanoparticlesÕ which are Ôlike lisubstanceÕ known as nanobots and hydrogel which can be Ôtriggeredat any moment to deliver its payloadÕ and act as ÔbiosensorsÕ. Thesynthetic substance had Ôthe ability to accumulate data from yourbody like your breathing, your respiration, thoughts and emotions,all kind of thingsÕ and each syringe could carry a million nanobots:
This substance because itÕs like little bits of computers in your body, crazy, but itÕs true, it can do that, [and] obviously has the ability to act through Wi-Fi. It can receive and transmit energy, messages, frequencies or impulses. That issue has never been addressed by these companies. What does that do to the human? 
Just imagine getting this substance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G, your smart device, your phones, what is happening with that? What if something is triggering it, too, like an impulse, a frequency? We have something completely foreign in the human body. 
Madej said her research revealed that electromagnetic (EMF)frequencies emidramatically in the same period of the ÔvaccineÕ rollout and she wasseeing more people with radiation problems as 5G and otherelectromagnetic technology was expanded and introduced to schoolsand hospitals. She said she was Ôßoored with the EMF coming o.Õthe devices she checked. All this makes total sense and syncs withmy own work of decades when you think that Moderna refers indocuments to its mRNA ÔvaccineÕ as an Ôoperating systemÕ:
Recognizing the broad potential of mRNA science, we set out to create an mRNA technology platform that functions very much like an operating system on a computer. It is designed so that it can plug and play interchangeably with different programs. In our case, the ÔprogramÕ or ÔappÕ is our mRNA drug Ð the unique mRNA sequence that codes for a protein É 
É Our MRNA Medicines Ð ÔThe ÔSoftware Of LifeÕ: When we have a concept for a new mRNA medicine and begin research, fundamental components are already in place. Generally, the only thing that changes from one potential mRNA medicine to another is the coding region Ð the actual genetic code that instructs ribosomes to make protein. Utilizing these instruction sets gives our investigational mRNA medicines a software-like quality. We also have the ability to combine different mRNA sequences encoding for different proteins in a single mRNA investigational medicine. 
Who needs a real ÔvirusÕ when you can create a computer version tojustify infusing your operating system into the entire human race onthe road to making living, breathing people into cyborgs? What ismissed with the ÔvaccinesÕ is the digital connection between syntheticmaterial and the body that I highlighted earlier with the study thathacked a computer with human DNA. On one level the body isdigital, based on mathematical codes, and IÕll have more about thatin the next chapter. Those who ridiculously claim that mRNAÔvaccinesÕ are not designed to change human genetics should explainthe words of Dr Tal Zaks, chief medical o.cer at Moderna, in a 2017TED talk. He said that over the last 30 years ÔweÕve been living thisphenomenal digital scientiÞc revolution, and IÕm here today to tellyou, that we are actually hacking the software of life, and that itÕschanging the way we think about prevention and treatment ofdiseaseÕ:
In every cell thereÕs this thing called messenger RNA, or mRNA for short, that transmits the critical information from the DNA in our genes to the protein, which is really the stuff weÕre all made out of. This is the critical information that determines what the cell will do. So we think about it as an operating system. So if you could change that, if you could introduce a line of code, or change a line of code, it turns out, that has profound implications for everything, from the flu to cancer. 
Zaks should more accurately have said that this has profoundimplications for the human genetic code and the nature of DNA.Communications within the body go both ways and not only one.But, hey, no, the ÔCovid vaccineÕ will not a.ect your genetics. Cultfact-checkers say so even though the man who helped to develop themRNA technique says that it does. Zaks said in 2017:
If you think about what it is weÕre trying to do. WeÕve taken information and our understanding of that information and how that information is transmitted in a cell, and weÕve taken our understanding of medicine and how to make drugs, and weÕre fusing the two. We think of it as information therapy. 
I have been writing for decades that the body is an informationÞeld communicating with itself and the wider world. This is why
radiation which is information can change the information Þeld ofbody and mind through phenomena like 5G and change their natureand function. ÔInformation therapyÕ means to change the bodyÕsinformation Þeld and change the way it operates. DNA is a receiver.transmimRNA synthetic messaging. Technology to do this has been readyand waiting in the underground bases and other secret projects to berolled out when the ÔCovidÕ hoax was played. ÔTrialsÕ of such shortand irrelevant duration were only for public consumption. Whenthey say the ÔvaccineÕ is ÔexperimentalÕ that is not true. It may appearto be ÔexperimentalÕ to those who donÕt know whatÕs going on, butthe trials have already been done to ensure the Cult gets the result itdesires. Zaks said that it took decades to sequence the humangenome, completed in 2003, but now they could do it in a week. ByÔtheyÕ he means scientists operating in the public domain. In thesecret projects they were sequencing the genome in a week longbefore even 2003.
Deluge of mRNA 
Highly signiÞcantly the Moderna document says the guidingpremise is that if using mRNA as a medicine works for one diseasethen it should work for many diseases. They were leveraging theßexibility a.orded by their platform and the fundamental rolemRNA plays in protein synthesis to pursue mRNA medicines for abroad spectrum of diseases. Moderna is conÞrming what I wassaying through 2020 that multiple ÔvaccinesÕ were planned forÔCovidÕ (and later invented ÔvariantsÕ) and that previous vaccineswould be converted to the mRNA system to infuse the body withmassive amounts of genetically-manipulating synthetic material tosecure a transformation to a synthetic-biological state. The ÔvaccinesÕare designed to kill stunning numbers as part of the long-exposedCult depopulation agenda and transform the rest. Given this is thegoal you can appreciate why there is such hysterical demand forevery human to be ÔvaccinatedÕ for an alleged ÔdiseaseÕ that has anestimated ÔinfectionÕ to ÔdeathÕ ratio of 0.23-0.15 percent. As I writechildren are being given the ÔvaccineÕ in trials (their parents are adisgrace) and ever-younger people are being o.ered the vaccine fora ÔvirusÕ that even if you believe it exists has virtually zero chance ofharming them. HorriÞc e.ects of the ÔtrialsÕ on a 12-year-old girlwere revealed by a family member to be serious brain and gastricproblems that included a bowel obstruction and the inability toswallow liquids or solids. She was unable to eat or drink withoutthrowing up, had extreme pain in her back, neck and abdomen, andwas paralysed from the waist down which stopped her urinatingunaided. When the girl was Þrst taken to hospital doctors said it wasall in her mind. She was signed up for the ÔtrialÕ by her parents forwhom no words su.ce. None of this ÔCovid vaccineÕ insanity makesany sense unless you see what the ÔvaccineÕ really is Ð a body-changer. Synthetic biology or ÔSynBioÕ is a fast-emerging andexpanding scientiÞc discipline which includes everything fromgenetic and molecular engineering to electrical and computerengineering. Synthetic biology is deÞned in these ways:
¥
A multidisciplinary area of research that seeks to create newbiological parts, devices, and systems, or to redesign systems thatare already found in nature.

¥
The use of a mixture of physical engineering and geneticengineering to create new (and therefore synthetic) life forms.

¥
An emerging Þeld of research that aims to combine theknowledge and methods of biology, engineering and relateddisciplines in the design of chemically-synthesized DNA to createorganisms with novel or enhanced characteristics and traits(synthetic organisms including humans).


We now have synthetic blood, skin, organs and limbs beingdeveloped along with synthetic body parts produced by 3D printers.These are all elements of the synthetic human programme and thiscomment by KurzweilÕs co-founder of the Singularity University,Peter Diamandis, can be seen in a whole new light with the ÔCovidÕhoax and the sanctions against those that refuse the ÔvaccineÕ:
Anybody who is going to be resisting the progress forward [to transhumanism] is going to be resisting evolution and, fundamentally, they will die out. ItÕs not a matter of whether itÕs good or bad. ItÕs going to happen. 
ÔResisting evolutionÕ? What absolute bollocks. The arrogance of thesepeople is without limit. His ÔitÕs going to happenÕ mantra is anotherway of saying Ôresistance is futileÕ to break the spirit of those pushingback and we must not fall for it. Getransforming ÔvaccineÕ into everyone is crucial to the Cult plan fortotal control and the desperation to achieve that is clear for anyoneto see. Vaccine passports are a major factor in this and they, too, are aform of resistance is futile. ItÕs NOT. The paper funded by theRockefeller Foundation for the 2013 Ôhealth conferenceÕ in Chinasaid:
We will interact more with artificial intelligence. The use of robotics, bio-engineering to augment human functioning is already well underway and will advance. Re-engineering of humans into potentially separate and unequal forms through genetic engineering or mixed human-robots raises debates on ethics and equality. 
A new demography is projected to emerge after 2030 [that year again] of technologies (robotics, genetic engineering, nanotechnology) producing robots, engineered organisms, ÔnanobotsÕ and artificial intelligence (AI) that can self-replicate. Debates will grow on the implications of an impending reality of human designed life. 
What is happening today is so long planned. The world armyenforcing the will of the world government is intended to be a robotarmy, not a human one. TodayÕs military and its technologicallyÔenhancedÕ troops, pilotless planes and driverless vehicles are juststepping stones to that end. Human soldiers are used as Cult fodderand its time they woke up to that and worked for the freedom of thepopulation instead of their own destruction and their familyÕsdestruction Ð the same with the police. Join us and letÕs sort this out.The phenomenon of enforce my own destruction is widespread inthe ÔCovidÕ era with Woker ÔluvviesÕ in the acting and entertainmentindustries supporting ÔCovidÕ rules which have destroyed theirprofession and the same with those among the public who put signson the doors of their businesses Ôclosed due to Covid Ð stay safeÕwhen many will never reopen. ItÕs a form of masochism and mostcertainly insanity.
Transgender = transhumanism 
When something explodes out of nowhere and is suddenlyeverywhere it is always the Cult agenda and so it is with the tidalwave of claims and demands that have inÞltrated every aspect ofsociety under the heading of ÔtransgenderismÕ. The term ÔtransÕ is soÔinÕ and this is the dictionary deÞnition:
A prefix meaning ÔacrossÕ, ÕthroughÕ, occurring É in loanwords from Latin, used in particular for denoting movement or conveyance from place to place (transfer; transmit; transplant) or complete change (transform; transmute), or to form adjectives meaning ÕcrossingÕ, Ôon the other side ofÕ, or Ôgoing beyondÕ the place named (transmontane; transnational; trans-Siberian). 
Transgender means to go beyond gender and transhuman meansto go beyond human. Both are aspects of the Cult plan to transformthe human body to a synthetic state with no gender. Human 2.0 is notdesigned to procreate and would be produced technologically withno need for parents. The new human would mean the end of parentsand so men, and increasingly women, are being targeted for thedeletion of their rights and status. Parental rights are disappearing atan ever-quickening speed for the same reason. The new humanwould have no need for men or women when there is no procreationand no gender. Perhaps the transgender movement that appears tobe in a permanent state of frenzy might now contemplate on how itis being used. This was never about transgender rights which areonly the interim excuse for confusing gender, particularly in theyoung, on the road to fusing gender. Transgender activism is not anend; it is a means to an end. We see again the technique of creativedestruction in which you destroy the status quo to Ôbuild back beÕin the form that you want. The gender status quo had to bedestroyed by persuading the Cult-created Woke mentality to believethat you can have 100 genders or more. A programme for 9 to 12year olds produced by the Cult-owned BBC promoted the 100genders narrative. The very idea may be the most monumentalnonsense, but it is not what is true that counts, only what you canmake people believe is true. Once the gender of 2 + 2 = 4 has beendismantled through indoctrination, intimidation and 2 + 2 = 5 thenthe new no-gender normal can take its place with Human 2.0.Aldous Huxley revealed the plan in his prophetic Brave New World in1932:
Natural reproduction has been done away with and children are created, decantedÕ, and raised in Ôhatcheries and conditioning centresÕ. From birth, people are genetically designed to fit into one of five castes, which are further split into ÔPlusÕ and ÔMinusÕ members and designed to fulfil predetermined positions within the social and economic strata of the World State. 
How could Huxley know this in 1932? For the same reason GeorgeOrwell knew about the Big Brother state in 1948, Cult insiders I havequoted knew about it in 1969, and I have known about it since theearly 1990s. If you are connected to the Cult or you work your ballso. to uncover the plan you can predict the future. The process issimple. If there is a plan for the world and nothing intervenes to stopit then it will happen. Thus if you communicate the plan ahead oftime you are perceived to have predicted the future, but you havenÕt.You have revealed the plan which without intervention will becomethe human future. The whole reason I have done what I have is toalert enough people to inspire an intervention and maybe at last thattime has come with the Cult and its intentions now so obvious toanyone with a brain in working order.
The future is here 
Technological wombs that Huxley described to replace parentprocreation are already being developed and they are only theprojects we know about in the public arena. Israeli scientists told The Times of Israel in March, 2021, that they have grown 250-cell embryos
into mouse foetuses with fully formed organs using artiÞcial wombsin a development they say could pave the way for gestating humansoutside the womb. Professor Jacob Hanna of the Weizmann Instituteof Science said:
We took mouse embryos from the mother at day five of development, when they are just of 250 cells, and had them in the incubator from day five until day 11, by which point they had grown all their organs. 
By day 11 they make their own blood and have a beating heart, a fully developed brain. Anybody would look at them and say, Ôthis is clearly a mouse foetus with all the characteristics of a mouse.Õ ItÕs gone from being a ball of cells to being an advanced foetus. 
A special liquid is used to nourish embryo cells in a laboratorydish and they ßoat on the liquid to duplicate the Þrst stage ofembryonic development. The incubator creates all the rightconditions for its development, Hanna said. The liquid gives theembryo Ôall the nutrients, hormones and sugars they needÕ alongwith a custom-made electronic incubator which controls gasconcentration, pressure and temperature. The cuunderground bases and other secret locations will be light yearsahead of that, however, and this was reported by the LondonGuardian in 2017:
We are approaching a biotechnological breakthrough. Ectogenesis, the invention of a complete external womb, could completely change the nature of human reproduction. In April this year, researchers at the ChildrenÕs Hospital of Philadelphia announced their development of an artificial womb. 
The article was headed ÔArtiÞcial wombs could soon be a reality.What will this mean for women?Õ What would it mean for children isan even bigger question. No mother to bond with only a machine inpreparation for a life of soulless interaction and control in a worldgoverned by machines (see the Matrix movies). Now observe thecalculated manipulations of the ÔCovidÕ hoax as human interactionand warmth has been curtailed by distancing, isolation and fear withpeople communicating via machines on a scale never seen before.
These are all dots in the same picture as are all the personalassistants, gadgets and childrenÕs toys through which kids andadults communicate with AI as if it is human. The AI ÔvoiceÕ on Sat-Nav should be included. All these things are psychologicalpreparation for the Cult endgame. Before you can make a physicalconnection with AI you have to make a psychological connectionand that is what people are being conditioned to do with this evergathering human-AI interaction. Movies and TV programmesdepicting the transhuman, robot dystopia relate to a phenomenonknown as Ôpre-emptive programmingÕ in which the world that isplanned is portrayed everywhere in movies, TV and advertising.This is conditioning the conscious and subconscious mind to becomefamiliar with the planned reality to dilute resistance when ithappens for real. What would have been a shock such is the changeis made less so. We have young children put on the road totransgender transition surgery with puberty blocking drugs at anage when they could never be able to make those life-changingdecisions.
Rachel Levine, a professor of paediatrics and psychiatry whobelieves in treating children this way, became AmericaÕs highest-ranked openly-transgender o.cial when she was conÞrmed as USAssistant Secretary at the Department of Health and HumanServices agovernments press for laws to deny parents a say in their childrenÕstransition process so the kids can be isolated and manipulated intoagreeing to irreversible medical procedures. A Canadian fatherRobert Hoogland was denied bail by the Vancouver Supreme Courtin 2021 and remained in jail for breaching a court order that he staysilent over his young teenage daughter, a minor, who was beingo.ered life-changing hormone therapy without parental consent. Atthe age of 12 the girlÕs Ôschool counsellorÕ said she may betransgender, referred her to a doctor and told the school to treat herlike a boy. This is another example of state-serving schools imposingever more control over childrenÕs lives while parents have ever less.
Contemptible and extreme child abuse is happening all over theworld as the Cult gender-fusion operation goes into warp-speed.
Why the war on men Ð and now women? 
The question about what artiÞcial wombs mean for women shouldrightly be asked. The answer can be seen in the deletion of womenÕsrights involving sport, changing rooms, toilets and status in favourof people in male bodies claiming to identify as women. I canidentify as a mountain climber, but it doesnÕt mean I can climb amountain any more than a biological man can be a biologicalwoman. To believe so is a triumph of belief over factual reality whichis the very perceptual basis of everything Woke. WomenÕs sport isbeing destroyed by allowing those with male bodies who say theyidentify as female to ÔcompeteÕ with girls and women. Male bodyÔwomenÕ dominate ÔwomenÕsÕ competition with their greater musclemass, bone density, strength and speed. With that disadvantagesport for women loses all meaning. To put this in perspective nearly300 American high school boys can run faster than the quickestwoman sprinter in the world. Women are seeing their previouslyprotected spaces invaded by male bodies simply because they claimto identify as women. ThatÕs all they need to do to access all womenÕsspaces and activities under the Biden ÔEquality ActÕ that destroysequality for women with the usual Orwellian Woke inversion. Malesex o.enders have already commiomenÕs prisons aclaiming to identify as women to get them transferred. Does this notmaoke ÔequalityÕ hypocrites? Not in the least. Whatmaactivists is to advance gender fusion on the way to the no-genderÔhumanÕ. When you are seeking to impose transparent nonsense likethis, or the ÔCovidÕ hoax, the only way the nonsense can prevail isthrough censorship and intimidation of dissenters, deletion offactual information, and programming of the unquestioning,bewildered and naive. You donÕt have to scan the world for long tosee that all these things are happening.
Many womenÕs rights organisations have realised that rights andstatus which took such a long time to secure are being eroded andthat it is systematic. Kara Dansky of the global WomenÕs HumanRights Campaign said that BidenÕs transgender executive orderimmediately he took o.ce, subsequent orders, and Equality Actlegislation that followed Ôseek to erase women and girls in the law asa categoryÕ. Exactly. I said during the long ago-started war on men(in which many women play a crucial part) that this was going toturn into a war on them. The Cult is phasing out both male andfemale genders. To get away with that they are brought into conßictso they are busy Þghting each other while the Cult completes the jobwith no unity of response. Unity, people, unity. We need unityeverywhere. Transgender is the only show in town as the big steptowards the no-gender human. ItÕs not about rights for transgenderpeople and never has been. Woke political correctness is deletingwords relating to genders to the same end. Wokers believe this is tobe ÔinclusiveÕ when the opposite is true. They are deleting wordsdescribing gender because gender itself is being deleted by Human
2.0. Terms like ÔmanÕ, ÔwomanÕ, ÔmotherÕ and ÔfatherÕ are beingdeleted in the universities and other institutions to be replaced bythe no-gender, not trans-gender, ÔindividualsÕ and ÔguardiansÕ.WomenÕs rights campaigner Maria Ke.er of Partners for EthicalCare said: ÔChildren are being taught from kindergarten upward thatsome boys have a vagina, some girls have a penis, and that kids canbe any gender they want to be.Õ Do we really believe that suddenlycountries all over the world at the same time had the idea of havingdrag queens go into schools or read transgender stories to veryyoung children in the local library? ItÕs coldly-calculated confusionof gender on the way to the fusion of gender. Suzanne Vierling, apsychologist from Southern California, made another importantpoint:
YesterdayÕs slave woman who endured gynecological medical experiments is todayÕs girl-child being butchered in a booming gender-transitioning sector. Ovaries removed, pushing her into menopause and osteoporosis, uncharted territory, and parentsÕ rights and authority decimated. 
The erosion of parental rights is a common theme in line with theCult plans to erase the very concept of parents and Ôovaries removed,pushing her into menopauseÕ means what? Those born female losethe ability to have children Ð another way to discontinue humanityas we know it.
Eliminating Human 1.0 (before our very eyes) 
To pave the way for Human 2.0 you must phase out Human 1.0. Thisis happening through plummeting sperm counts and makingwomen infertile through an onslaught of chemicals, radiation(including smartphones in pockets of men) and mRNA ÔvaccinesÕ.Common agriculture pesticides are also having a devastating impacton human fertility. I have been tracking collapsing sperm counts inthe books for a long time and in 2021 came a book by fertilityscientist and reproductive epidemiologist Shanna Swan, Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the Future of the Human Race. She reports how the global fertility rate dropped byhalf between 1960 and 2016 with AmericaÕs birth rate 16 percentbelow where it needs to be to sustain the population. Women areexperiencing declining egg quality, more miscarriages, and morecouples su.er from infertility. Other Þndings were an increase inerectile dysfunction, infant boys developing more genitalabnormalities, male problems with conception, and plunging levelsof the male hormone testosterone which would explain why somany men have lost their backbone and masculinity. This has beenvery evident during the ÔCovidÕ hoax when women have beenprominent among the Pushbackers and big strapping blokes havebowed their heads, covered their faces with a nappy and quietlysubmiglobal education introduced the concept of ÔweÕre all winnersÕ insport and classrooms: ÔCompetition was defused, and it in turndefused a sense of Þghting back.Õ This is another version of theÔequityÕ doctrine in which you drive down rather than raise up.What a contrast in Cult-controlled China with its global ambitionswhere the government published plans in January, 2021, to ÔcultivatemasculinityÕ in boys from kindergarten through to high school in theface of a Ômasculinity crisisÕ. A government adviser said boys wouldbe soon become Ôdelicate, timid and e.eminateÕ unless action wastaken. DonÕt expect any similar policy in the targeted West. A 2006study showed that a 65-year-old man in 2002 had testosterone levels15 percent lower than a 65-year-old man in 1987 while a 2020 studyfound a similar story with young adults and adolescents. Men aregecauses an even greater drop in sperm count with up to 99 percentseeing sperm counts drop to zero during the treatment. More spermis defective and malfunctioning with some having two heads or notpursuing an egg.
A class of synthetic chemicals known as phthalates are beingblamed for the decline. These are found everywhere in plastics,shampoos, cosmetics, furniture, ßame retardants, personal careproducts, pesticides, canned foods and even receipts. Why tillreceipts? Everyone touches them. Let no one delude themselves thatall this is not systematic to advance the long-time agenda for humanbody transformation. Phthalates mimic hormones and disrupt thehormone balance causing testosterone to fall and genital birthdefects in male infants. Animals and Þsh have been a.ected in thesame way due to phthalates and other toxins in rivers. When Þshturn gay or change sex through chemicals in rivers and streams it isa pointer to why there has been such an increase in gay people andthe sexually confused. It doesnÕt machoose to be, but if itÕs being a.ected by chemical pollution andconsumption then we need to know. Does anyone really think thatthis is not connected to the transgender agenda, the war on men andthe condemnation of male Ôtoxic masculinityÕ? You watch this beingfollowed by Ôtoxic femininityÕ. ItÕs already happening. Whenbreastfeeding becomes Ôchest-feedingÕ, pregnant women becomepregnant people along with all the other Woke claptrap you knowthat the world is going insane and thereÕs a Cult scam in progress.Transgender activists are promoting the Cult agenda while Cultbillionaires support and fund the insanity as they laugh themselvesto sleep at the sheer stupidity for which humans must be infamousin galaxies far, far away.
ÔCovid vaccinesÕ and female infertility 
We can now see why the ÔvaccineÕ has been connected to potentialinfertility in women. Dr Michael Yeadon, former Vice President andChief ScientiÞc Advisor at PÞzer, and Dr Wolfgang Wodarg inGermany, Þled a petition with the European Medicines Agency inDecember, 2020, urging them to stop trials for the PÞzer/BioNTechshot and all other mRNA trials until further studies had been done.They were particularly concerned about possible e.ects on fertilitywith ÔvaccineÕ-produced antibodies awhich is responsible for developing the placenta. The result wouldbe infertility Ôof indeÞnite durationÕ in women who have theÔvaccineÕ with the placenta failing to form. Section 10.4.2 of thePÞzer/BioNTech trial protocol says that pregnant women or thosewho might become so should not have mRNA shots. Section 10.4warns men taking mRNA shots to Ôbe abstinent from heterosexualintercourseÕ and not to donate sperm. The UK government said thatit did not know if the mRNA procedure had an e.ect on fertility. Did not know? These people have to go to jail. UK government advice didnot recommend at the start that pregnant women had the shot andsaid they should avoid pregnancy for at least two months aÔvaccinationÕ. The ÔadviceÕ was later updated to pregnant womenshould only have the ÔvaccineÕ if the beneÞts outweighed the risks tomother and foetus. What the hell is that supposed to mean? ThenÔspontaneous abortionsÕ began to appear and rapidly increase on theadverse reaction reporting schemes which include only a fraction ofadverse reactions. Thousands and ever-growing numbers ofÔvaccinatedÕ women are describing changes to their menstrual cyclewith heavier blood ßow, irregular periods and menstruating againae.ects. Women are passing blood clots and the lining of their uteruswhile men report erectile dysfunction and blood e.ects. MostsigniÞcantly of all unvaccinated women began to report similarmenstrual changes aÔvaccinatedÕ people and menand children were also a.ected with bleeding noses, blood clots andother conditions. ÔSheddingÕ is when vaccinated people can emit thecontent of a vaccine to a.ect the unvaccinated, but this is di.erent.ÔVaccinatedÕ people were not shedding a Ôlive virusÕ allegedly inÔvaccinesÕ as before because the fake ÔCovid vaccinesÕ involvesynthetic material and other toxicity. Doctors exposing what ishappening prefer the term ÔtransmissionÕ to shedding. Somehowthose that have had the shots are transmihavenÕt. Dr Carrie Madej said the nano-content of the ÔvaccinesÕ canÔact like an antennaÕ to others around them which Þts perfectly withmy own conclusions. This ÔvaccineÕ transmission phenomenon wasbecoming known as the book went into production and I deal withthis further in the Postscript.
Vaccine e.ects on sterility are well known. The World HealthOrganization was accused in 2014 of sterilising millions of women inKenya with the evidence conÞrmed by the content of the vaccinesinvolved. The same WHO behind the ÔCovidÕ hoax admiinvolvement for more than ten years with the vaccine programme.Other countries made similar claims. Charges were lodged byTanzania, Nicaragua, Mexico, and the Philippines. The Gardasilvaccine claimed to protect against a genital ÔvirusÕ known as HPVhas also been linked to infertility. Big Pharma and the WHO (samething) are criminal and satanic entities. Then thereÕs the Bill GatesFoundation which is connected through funding and sharedinterests with 20 pharmaceutical giants and laboratories. He standsaccused of directing the policy of United Nations ChildrenÕs Fund(UNICEF), vaccine alliance GAVI, and other groupings, to advancethe vaccine agenda and silence opposition at great cost to womenand children. At the same time Gates wants to reduce the globalpopulation. Coincidence?
Great Reset = Smart Grid = new human 
The Cult agenda I have been exposing for 30 years is now beingopenly promoted by Cult assets like Gates and Klaus Schwab of theWorld Economic Forum under code-terms like the ÔGreat ResetÕ,ÔBuild Back BeÕ and Ôa rare but narrow window of opportunity toreßect, reimagine, and reset our worldÕ. What provided this Ôrare butnarrow window of opportunityÕ? The ÔCovidÕ hoax did. Who createdthat? They did. My books from not that long ago warned about theplanned ÔInternet of ThingsÕ (IoT) and its implications for humanfreedom. This was the plan to connect all technology to the Internetand artiÞcial intelligence and today we are way down that road withan estimated 36 billion devices connected to the World Wide Weband that Þgure is projected to be 76 billion by 2025. I further warnedthat the Cult planned to go beyond that to the Internet of Everything when the human brain was connected via AI to the Internet andKurzweilÕs ÔcloudÕ. Now we have Cult operatives like Schwab callingfor precisely that under the term ÔInternet of BodiesÕ, a fusion of thephysical, digital and biological into one centrally-controlled SmartGrid system which the Cult refers to as the ÔFourth IndustrialRevolutionÕ. They talk about the ÔbiologicalÕ, but they really meanthe synthetic-biological which is required to fully integrate thehuman body and brain into the Smart Grid and artiÞcial intelligenceplanned to replace the human mind. We have everything beingsynthetically manipulated including the natural world throughGMO and smart dust, the food we eat and the human body itselfwith synthetic ÔvaccinesÕ. I said in The Answer that we would see theCult push for synthetic meat to replace animals and in February,2021, the so predictable psychopath Bill Gates called for theintroduction of synthetic meat to save us all from Ôclimate changeÕ.The climate hoax just keeps on giving like the ÔCovidÕ hoax. The waron meat by vegan activists is a carbon (oops, sorry) copy of themanipulation of transgender activists. They have no idea (excepttheir inner core) that they are being used to promote and impose theagenda of the Cult or that they are only the vehicle and not the reason.This is not to say those who choose not to eat meat shouldnÕt berespected and supported in that right, but there are ulterior motivesfor those in power. A Forbes article in December, 2019, highlightedthe plan so beloved of Schwab and the Cult under the heading:ÔWhat Is The Internet of Bodies? And How Is It Changing OurWorld?Õ The article said the human body is the latest data platform(remember Ôour vaccine is an operating systemÕ). Forbes describedthe plan very accurately and the words could have come straight outof my books from long before:
The Internet of Bodies (IoB) is an extension of the IoT and basically connects the human body to a network through devices that are ingested, implanted, or connected to the body in some way. Once connected, data can be exchanged, and the body and device can be remotely monitored and controlled. 
They were really describing a human hive mind with humanperception centrally-dictated via an AI connection as well asallowing people to be Ôremotely monitored and controlledÕ.Everything from a fridge to a human mind could be directed from acentral point by these insane psychopaths and ÔCovid vaccinesÕ arecrucial to this. Forbes explained the process I mentioned earlier ofholdable and wearable technology followed by implantable. Thearticle said there were three generations of the Internet of Bodies thatinclude:
¥
Body external: These are wearable devices such as Apple Watchesor Fitbits that can monitor our health.

¥
Body internal: These include pacemakers, cochlear implants, anddigital pills that go inside our bodies to monitor or control variousaspects of health.

¥
Body embedded: The third generation of the Internet of Bodies isembedded technology where technology and the human body aremelded together and have a real-time connection to a remotemachine.


Forbes noted the development of the Brain Computer Interface (BCI)which merges the brain with an external device for monitoring andcontrolling in real-time. ÔThe ultimate goal is to help restore functionto individuals with disabilities by using brain signals rather thanconventional neuromuscular pathways.Õ Oh, do fuck o.. The goal ofbrain interface technology is controlling human thought andemotion from the central point in a hive mind serving its masterswishes. Many people are now agreeing to be chipped to open doorswithout a key. You can recognise them because theyÕll be wearing amask, social distancing and lining up for the ÔvaccineÕ. The Cultplans a Great Reset money system ae completed thedemolition of the global economy in which ÔmoneyÕ will beexchanged through communication with body operating systems.Rand Corporation, a Cult-owned think tank, said of the Internet ofBodies or IoB:
Internet of Bodies technologies fall under the broader IoT umbrella. But as the name suggests, IoB devices introduce an even more intimate interplay between humans and gadgets. IoB devices monitor the human body, collect health metrics and other personal information, and transmit those data over the Internet. Many devices, such as fitness trackers, are already in use É IoB devices É and those in development can track, record, and store usersÕ whereabouts, bodily functions, and what they see, hear, and even think. 
SchwabÕs World Economic Forum, a long-winded way of sayingÔfascismÕ or Ôthe CultÕ, has gone full-on with the Internet of Bodies inthe ÔCovidÕ era. ÔWeÕre entering the era of the Internet of BodiesÕ, itdeclared, Ôcollecting our physical data via a range of devices that canbe implanted, swallowed or wornÕ. The result would be a hugeamount of health-related data that could improve human wellbeingaround the world, and prove crucial in Þghting the ÔCovid-19pandemicÕ. Does anyone think these clowns care about ÔhumanwellbeingÕ aastation their pandemic hoax haspurposely caused? Schwab and co say we should move forward withthe Internet of Bodies because ÔKeeping track of symptoms couldhelp us stop the spread of infection, and quickly detect new casesÕ.How wonderful, but keeping trackÕ is all they are really botheredabout. Researchers were investigating if data gathered fromsmartwatches and similar devices could be used as viral infectionalerts by tracking the userÕs heart rate and breathing. Schwab said inhis 2018 book Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution:
The lines between technologies and beings are becoming blurred and not just by the ability to create lifelike robots or synthetics. Instead it is about the ability of new technologies to literally become part of us. Technologies already influence how we understand ourselves, how we think about each other, and how we determine our realities. As the technologies É give us deeper access to parts of ourselves, we may begin to integrate digital technologies into our bodies. 
You can see what the game is. Twenty-four hour control and people
Ð if you could still call them that Ð would never know whensomething would go ping and take them out of circulation. ItÕs themost obvious rush to a global fascist dictatorship and the completesubmission of humanity and yet still so many are locked away intheir Cult-induced perceptual coma and canÕt see it.
Smart Grid control centres 
The human body is being transformed by the ÔvaccinesÕ and in otherways into a synthetic cyborg that can be aGrid which would be controlled from a central point and other sub-locations of Grid manipulation. Where are these planned to be? Well,China for a start which is one of the CultÕs biggest centres ofoperation. The technological control system and technocratic rulewas incubated here to be unleashed across the world aÔCovidÕ hoax came out of China in 2020. Another Smart Grid locationthat will surprise people new to this is Israel. I have exposed in The Trigger how Sabbatian technocrats, intelligence and militaryoperatives were behind the horrors of 9/11 and not `19 Arab h.ackersÕwho somehow manifested the ability to pilot big passenger airlinerswhen instructors at puddle-jumping ßying schools described someof them as a joke. The 9/11 aere made possible throughcontrol of civilian and military air computer systems and those of theWhite House, Pentagon and connected agencies. See The Trigger Ð itwill blow your mind. The controlling and coordinating force werethe Sabbatian networks in Israel and the United States which by thenhad inÞltrated the entire US government, military and intelligencesystem. The real name of the American Deep State is ÔSabbatianStateÕ. Israel is a tiny country of only nine million people, but it isone of the global centres of cyber operations and fast catching SiliconValley in importance to the Cult. Israel is known as the Ôstart-upnationÕ for all the cyber companies spawned there with theSabbatian specialisation of Ôcyber securityÕ that I mentioned earlierwhich gives those companies access to computer systems of theirclients in real time through ÔbackdoorsÕ wrisecurity soare is downloaded. The Sabbatian centre of cyberoperations outside Silicon Valley is the Israeli military CyberIntelligence Unit, the biggest infrastructure project in IsraelÕs history,headquartered in the desert-city of Beersheba and involving some20,000 Ôcyber soldiersÕ. Here are located a literal army of Internettrolls scanning social media, forums and comment lists for anyonechallenging the Cult agenda. The UK military has something similarwith its 77th Brigade and associated operations. The Beershebacomplex includes research and development centres for other Cultoperations such as Intel, Microso.Packard, Cisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola. Techcrunch.comran an article about the Beersheba global Internet technology centreheadlined ÔIsraelÕs desert city of Beersheba is turning into a cybertechoasisÕ:
The militaryÕs massive relocation of its prestigious technology units, the presence of multinational and local companies, a close proximity to Ben Gurion University and generous government subsidies are turning Beersheba into a major global cybertech hub. Beersheba has all of the ingredients of a vibrant security technology ecosystem, including Ben Gurion University with its graduate program in cybersecurity and Cyber Security Research Center, and the presence of companies such as EMC, Deutsche Telekom, PayPal, Oracle, IBM, and Lockheed Martin. ItÕs also the future home of the INCB (Israeli National Cyber Bureau); offers a special income tax incentive for cyber security companies, and was the site for the relocation of the armyÕs intelligence corps units. 
Sabbatians have taken over the cyber world through the followingprocess: They scan the schools for likely cyber talent and developthem at Ben Gurion University and their period of conscription inthe Israeli Defense Forces when they are stationed at the Beershebacomplex. When the cyber talented o.cially leave the army they arefunded to start cyber companies with technology developed bythemselves or given to them by the state. Much of this is stolenthrough backdoors of computer systems around the world withAmerica top of the list. Others are sent o. to Silicon Valley to startcompanies or join the major ones and so we have many majorpositions Þlled by apparently ÔJewishÕ but really Sabbatianoperatives. Google, YouTube and Facebook are all run by ÔJewishÕCEOs while TwiPaul Singer. At the centre of the Sabbatian global cyber web is theIsraeli armyÕs Unit 8200 which specialises in hacking into computersystems of other countries, inserting viruses, gathering information,instigating malfunction, and even taking control of them from adistance. A long list of Sabbatians involved with 9/11, Silicon Valleyand Israeli cyber security companies are operatives of Unit 8200.This is not about Israel. ItÕs about the Cult. Israel is planned to be aSmart Grid hub as with China and what is happening at Beersheba isnot for the beneÞt of Jewish people who are treated disgustingly bythe Sabbatian elite that control the country. A glance at theNuremberg Codes will tell you that.
The story is much bigger than ÔCovidÕ, important as that is towhere we are being taken. Now, though, itÕs time to really strap in.ThereÕs more É much more É
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
Who controls the Cult? 
Awake, arise or be forever fallÕn John Milton, Paradise Lost 
Ihave exposed this far the level of the Cult conspiracy that operatesin the world of the seen and within the global secret society andsatanic network which operates in the shadows one step back fromthe seen. The story, however, goes much deeper than that.
The ÔCovidÕ hoax is major part of the Cult agenda, but only part,and to grasp the biggest picture we have to expand our abeyond the realm of human sight and into the inÞnity of possibilitythat we cannot see. It is from here, ultimately, that humanity is beingmanipulated into a state of total control by the force which dictatesthe actions of the Cult. How much of reality can we see? Next todamn all is the answer. We may appear to see all there is to see in theÔspaceÕ our eyes survey and observe, but lithe truth. The human ÔworldÕ is only a tiny band of frequency thatthe bodyÕs visual and perceptual systems can decode into perception of a ÔworldÕ. According to mainstream science the electromagneticspectrum is 0.005 percent of what exists in the Universe (Fig 10). Themaximum estimate I have seen is 0.5 percent and either way itÕsminiscule. I say it is far, far, smaller even than 0.005 percent whenyou compare reality we see with the totality of reality that we donÕt.Now get this if you are new to such information: Visible light, theonly band of frequency that we can see, is a fraction of the 0.005
percent (Fig 11 overleaf). Take this further and realise that ouruniverse is one of inÞnite universes and that universes are only afragment of overall reality Ð infinite reality. Then compare that withthe almost inÞnitesimal frequency band of visible light or humansight. You see that humans are as near blind as it is possible to bewithout actually being so. Artist and Þlmmaker, Sergio Toporek,said:


Consider that you can see less than 1% of the electromagnetic spectrum and hear less than 1% of the acoustic spectrum. 90% of the cells in your body carry their own microbial DNA and are not ÔyouÕ. The atoms in your body are 99.9999999999999999% empty space and none of them are the ones you were born with ... Human beings have 46 chromosomes, two less than a potato. 
The existence of the rainbow depends on the conical photoreceptors in your eyes; to animals without cones, the rainbow does not exist. So you donÕt just look at a rainbow, you create it. This is pretty amazing, especially considering that all the beautiful colours you see represent less than 1% of the electromagnetic spectrum. 
Suddenly the ÔworldÕ of humans looks a very di.erent place. Takeinto account, too, that Planet Earth when compared with theprojected size of this single universe is the equivalent of a billionth ofa pinhead. Imagine the ratio that would be when compared toinÞnite reality. To think that Christianity once insisted that Earth andhumanity were the centre of everything. This background is vital ifwe are going to appreciate the nature of ÔhumanÕ and how we can bemanipulated by an unseen force. To human visual reality virtuallyeverything is unseen and yet the prevailing perception within theinstitutions and so much of the public is that if we canÕt see it, touchit, hear it, taste it and smell it then it cannot exist. Such perception isindoctrinated and encouraged by the Cult and its agents because itisolates believers in the strictly limited, village-idiot, realm of the Þvesenses where perceptions can be Þrewalled and informationcontrolled. Most of those perpetuating the Ôthis-world-is-all-there-isÕinsanity are themselves indoctrinated into believing the samedelusion. While major players and inßuencers know that o.cialreality is laughable most of those in science, academia and medicinereally believe the nonsense they peddle and teach succeedinggenerations. Those who challenge the orthodoxy are dismissed asnuexposure. Observe the dynamic of the ÔCovidÕ hoax and you will seehow that takes the same form. The inner-circle psychopaths knowsitÕs a gigantic scam, but almost the entirety of those imposing theirfascist rules believe that ÔCovidÕ is all that theyÕre told it is.
Stolen identity 
Ask people who they are and they will give you their name, place ofbirth, location, job, family background and life story. Yet that is notwho they are Ð it is what they are experiencing. The di.erence isabsolutely crucial. The true ÔIÕ, the eternal, inÞnite ÔIÕ, is consciousness,
a state of being aware. Forget ÔformÕ. That is a vehicle for a briefexperience. Consciousness does not come from the brain, but through the brain and even that is more symbolic than literal. We areawareness, pure awareness, and this is what withdraws from thebody at what we call ÔdeathÕ to continue our eternal beingness,isness, in other realms of reality within the limitlessness of inÞnity orthe Biblical Ômany mansions in my fatherÕs houseÕ. Labels of ahuman life, man, woman, transgender, black, white, brown,nationality, circumstances and income are not who we are. They arewhat we are Ð awareness Ð is experiencing in a brief connection with aband of frequency we call ÔhumanÕ. The labels are not the self; theyare, to use the title of one of my books, a Phantom Self. I am notDavid Icke born in Leicester, England, on April 29th, 1952. I am theconsciousness having that experience. The Cult and its non-humanmasters seek to convince us through the institutions of ÔeducationÕ,science, medicine, media and government that what we areexperiencing is who we are. ItÕs so easy to control and directperception locked away in the bewildered illusions of the Þve senseswith no expanded radar. Try, by contrast, doing the same with ahumanity aware of its true self and its true power to consciouslycreate its reality and experience. How is it possible to do this? We doit all day every day. If you perceive yourself as Ôlipower to impact upon your life and the world then your lifeexperience will reßect that. You will hand the power you donÕt thinkyou have to authority in all its forms which will use it to control yourexperience. This, in turn, will appear to conÞrm your perception ofÔlireally is Ð a perception. We are all Ôbig-meÕ, inÞnite me, and the Culthas to make us forget that if its will is to prevail. We are thereforemanipulated and pressured into self-identifying with human labelsand not the consciousness/awareness experiencing those humanlabels.
The phenomenon of identity politics is a Cult-instigatedmanipulation technique to sub-divide previous labels into evensmaller ones. A United States university employs this list of ledescribe student identity: LGBTTQQFAGPBDSM or lesbian, gay,bisexual, transgender, transsexual, queer, questioning, ßexual,asexual, gender-fuck, polyamorous, bondage/discipline,dominance/submission and sadism/masochism. IÕm sure other listsare even longer by now as people feel the need to self-identity the ÔIÕwith the minutiae of race and sexual preference. Wokersprogrammed by the Cult for generations believe this is aboutÔinclusivityÕ when itÕs really the Cult locking them away into smallerand smaller versions of Phantom Self while Þrewalling them fromthe inßuence of their true self, the inÞnite, eternal ÔIÕ. You may noticethat my philosophy which contends that we are all unique points ofaareness within the same inÞnite whole or Oneness is theultimate non-racism. The very sense of Oneness makes thejudgement of people by their body-type, colour or sexuality uridiculous and conÞrms that racism has no understanding of reality(including anti-white racism). Yet despite my perception of life Cultagents and fast-asleep Wokers label me racist to discredit myinformation while they are themselves phenomenally racist andsexist. All they see is race and sexuality and they judge people asgood or bad, demons or untouchables, by their race and sexuality.All they see is Phantom Self and perceive themselves in terms ofPhantom Self. They are pawns and puppets of the Cult agenda tofocus ae senses and play thoseidentities against each other to divide and rule. Columbia Universityhas introduced segregated graduations in another version of socialdistancing designed to drive people apart and teach them thatdi.erent racial and cultural groups have nothing in common witheach other. The last thing the Cult wants is unity. Again the pump-primers of this will be Cult operatives in the knowledge of what theyare doing, but the rest are just the Phantom Self blind leading thePhantom Self blind. We do have something in common Ð we are allthe same consciousness having di.erent temporary experiences.
What is this ÔhumanÕ? 
Yes, what is ÔhumanÕ? That is what we are supposed to be, right? Imean ÔhumanÕ? True, but ÔhumanÕ is the experience not the ÔIÕ. Breakit down to basics and ÔhumanÕ is the way that information isprocessed. If we are to experience and interact with this band offrequency we call the ÔworldÕ we must have a vehicle that operateswithin that band of frequency. Our consciousness in its prime formcannot do that; it is way beyond the frequency of the human realm.My consciousness or awareness could not tap these keys and pick upthe cup in front of me in the same way that radio station A cannotinteract with radio station B when they are on di.erent frequencies.The human body is the means through which we have thatinteraction. I have long described the body as a biological computerwhich processes information in a way that allows consciousness toexperience this reality. The body is a receiver, transmiprocessor of information in a particular way that we call human. Wevisually perceive only the world of the Þve senses in a wakened state
Ð that is the limit of the bodyÕs visual decoding system. In truth itÕsnot even visual in the way we experience Ôvisual realityÕ as I willcome to in a moment. We are ÔhumanÕ because the body processesthe information sources of human into a reality and behavioursystem that we perceive as human. Why does an elephant act like anelephant and not like a human or a duck? The elephantÕs biologicalcomputer is a di.erent information Þeld and processes informationaccording to that program into a visual and behaviour type we callan elephant. The same applies to everything in our reality. Thesebody information Þelds are perpetuated through procreation (likemaking a copy of a soware program). The Cult wants to break thatcycle and intervene technologically to transform the humaninformation Þeld into one that will change what we call humanity. Ifit can change the human information Þeld it will change the waythat Þeld processes information and change humanity bothÔphysicallyÕ and psychologically. Hence the messenger (information)RNA ÔvaccinesÕ and so much more that is targeting human geneticsby changing the bodyÕs information Ð messaging Ð construct throughfood, drink, radiation, toxicity and other means.
Reality that we experience is nothing like reality as it really is inthe same way that the reality people experience in virtual realitygames is not the reality they are really living in. The game is only adecoded source of information that appears to be a reality. Ourworld is also an information construct Ð a simulation (more later). Inits base form our reality is a waveÞeld of information much the samein theme as Wi-Fi. The Þve senses decode waveÞeld information intoelectrical information which they communicate to the brain todecode into holographic (illusory ÔphysicalÕ) information. Di.erentparts of the brain specialise in decoding di.erent senses and theinformation is fused into a reality that appears to be outside of usbut is really inside the brain and the genetic structure in general (Fig12 overleaf). DNA is a receiver-transmipart of this decoding process and the bodyÕs connection to otherrealities. Change DNA and you change the way we decode andconnect with reality Ð see ÔCovid vaccinesÕ. Think of computersdecoding Wi-Fi. You have information encoded in a radiation Þeldand the computer decodes that information into a very di.erentform on the screen. You canÕt see the Wi-Fi until its information ismade manifest on the screen and the information on the screen isinside the computer and not outside. I have just described how wedecode the Ôhuman worldÕ. All Þve senses decode the waveform ÔWi-FiÕ Þeld into electrical signals and the brain (computer) constructsreality inside the brain and not outside Ð ÔYou donÕt just look at arainbow, you create itÕ. Sound is a simple example. We donÕt hearsound until the brain decodes it. Waveform sound waves are pickedup by the hearing sense and communicated to the brain in anelectrical form to be decoded into the sounds that we hear.Everything we hear is inside the brain along with everything we see,feel, smell and taste. Words and language are waveform Þeldsgenerated by our vocal chords which pass through this process untilthey are decoded by the brain into words that we hear. Di.erentlanguages are di.erent frequency Þelds or sound waves generatedby vocal chords. Late British philosopher Alan Wa

[Without the brain] the world is devoid of light, heat, weight, solidity, motion, space, time or any other imaginable feature. All these phenomena are interactions, or transactions, of vibrations with a certain arrangement of neurons. 
ThatÕs exactly what they are and scientist Robert Lanza describes inhis book, Biocentrism, how we decode electromagnetic waves andenergy into visual and ÔphysicalÕ experience. He uses the example ofa ßame emi, each pulsingelectrically and magnetically:
É these É invisible electromagnetic waves strike a human retina, and if (and only if) the waves happen to measure between 400 and 700 nano meters in length from crest to crest, then their energy is just right to deliver a stimulus to the 8 million cone-shaped cells in the retina. 
Each in turn send an electrical pulse to a neighbour neuron, and on up the line this goes, at 250 mph, until it reaches the É occipital lobe of the brain, in the back of the head. There, a cascading complex of neurons fire from the incoming stimuli, and we subjectively perceive this experience as a yellow brightness occurring in a place we have been conditioned to call the Ôexternal worldÕ. 
You hear what you decode 
If a tree falls or a building collapses they make no noise unlesssomeone is there to decode the energetic waves generated by thedisturbance into what we call sound. Does a falling tree make anoise? Only if you hear it Ð decode it. Everything in our reality is afrequency Þeld of information operating within the overall ÔWi-FiÕÞeld that I call The Field. A vibrational disturbance is generated inThe Field by the Þelds of the falling tree or building. Thesedisturbance waves are what we decode into the sound of themfalling. If no one is there to do that then neither will make any noise.Reality is created by the observer Ð decoder Ð and the perceptions ofthe observer a.ect the decoding process. For this reason di.erentpeople Ð di.erent perceptions Ð will perceive the same reality orsituation in a di.erent way. What one may perceive as a nightmareanother will see as an opportunity. The question of why the Cult isso focused on controlling human perception now answers itself. Allexperienced reality is the act of decoding and we donÕt experienceWi-Fi until it is decoded on the computer screen. The sight andsound of an Internet video is encoded in the Wi-Fi all around us, butwe donÕt see or hear it until the computer decodes that information.Taste, smell and touch are all phenomena of the brain as a result ofthe same process. We donÕt taste, smell or feel anything except in thebrain and there are pain relief techniques that seek to block thesignal from the site of discomfort to the brain because if the braindoesnÕt decode that signal we donÕt feel pain. Pain is in the brain andonly appears to be at the point of impact thanks to the feedback loopbetween them. We donÕt see anything until electrical informationfrom the sight senses is decoded in an area at the back of the brain. Ifthat area is damaged we can go blind when our eyes are perfectlyokay. So why do we go blind if we damage an eye? We damage theinformation processing between the waveform visual informationand the visual decoding area of the brain. If information doesnÕtreach the brain in a form it can decode then we canÕt see the visualreality that it represents. WhatÕs more the brain is decoding only afraction of the information it receives and the rest is absorbed by the
sub-conscious mind. This explanation is from the science magazine,Wonderpedia:
Every second, 11 million sensations crackle along these [brain] pathways ... The brain is confronted with an alarming array of images, sounds and smells which it rigorously filters down until it is left with a manageable list of around 40. Thus 40 sensations per second make up what we perceive as reality. 
The ÔworldÕ is not what people are told to believe that is it and theinner circles of the Cult know that.
Illusory ÔphysicalÕ reality 
We can only see a smear of 0.005 percent of the Universe which isonly one of a vast array of universes Ð ÔmansionsÕ Ð within inÞnitereality. Even then the brain decodes only 40 pieces of information(ÔsensationsÕ) from a potential 11 million that we receive everysecond. Two points strike you from this immediately: The sheerbreathtaking stupidity of believing we know anything so rigidly thatthereÕs nothing more to know; and the potential for these processesto be manipulated by a malevolent force to control the reality of thepopulation. One thing I can say for sure with no risk of contradictionis that when you can perceive an almost indescribable fraction ofinÞnite reality there is always more to know as in tidal waves of it.Ancient Greek philosopher Socrates was so right when he said thatwisdom is to know how lie know. How obviously true that iswhen you think that we are experiencing a physical world of soliditythat is neither physical nor solid and a world of apartness wheneverything is connected. Cult-controlled ÔscienceÕ dismisses the so-called ÔparanormalÕ and all phenomena related to that when theÔparaÕ-normal is perfectly normal and explains the alleged ÔgreatmysteriesÕ which dumbfound scientiÞc minds. There is a reason forthis. A ÔscientiÞc mindÕ in terms of the mainstream is a materialmind, a Þve-sense mind imprisoned in see it, touch it, hear it, smell itand taste it. Phenomena and happenings that canÕt be explained thatway leave the ÔscientiÞc mindÕ bewildered and the rule is that if theycanÕt account for why something is happening then it canÕt, bydeÞnition, be happening. I beg to di.er. Telepathy is thought wavespassing through The Field (think wave disturbance again) to bedecoded by someone able to connect with that wavelength(information). For example: You can pick up the thought waves of afriend at any distance and at the very least that will bring them tomind. A few minutes later the friend calls you. ÔMy godÕ, you say,ÔthatÕs incredible Ð I was just thinking of you.Õ Ah, but they werethinking of you before they made the call and thatÕs what youdecoded. Native peoples not entrapped in Þve-sense reality do thisso well it became known as the Ôbush telegraphÕ. Those known aspsychics and mediums (genuine ones) are doing the same onlyacross dimensions of reality. ÔMind over maÕ comes from the factthat masame. The state of one inßuences thestate of the other. Indeed one and the other are illusions. They areaspects of the same Þeld. Paranormal phenomena are all explainableso why are they still considered ÔmysteriesÕ or not happening? Onceyou go down this road of understanding you begin to expandawareness beyond the Þve senses and thatÕs the nightmare for theCult.


Holographic ÔsolidityÕ 
Our reality is not solid, it is holographic. We are now well aware ofholograms which are widely used today. Two-dimensionalinformation is decoded into a three-dimensional reality that is notsolid although can very much appear to be (Fig 13). Holograms arecreated with a laser divided into two parts. One goes directly onto aholographic photographic print (Ôreference beamÕ) and the othertakes a waveform image of the subject (Ôworking beamÕ) before beingdirected onto the print where it ÔcollidesÕ with the other half of thelaser (Fig 14). This creates a waveform interference pacontains the waveÞeld information of whatever is beingphotographed (Fig 15 overleaf). The process can be likened todropping pebbles in a pond. Waves generated by each one spreadout across the water to collide with the others and create a waverepresentation of where the stones fell and at what speed, weightand distance. A waveform interference pato the waveform information in The Field which the Þve sensesdecode into electrical signals to be decoded by the brain into aholographic illusory ÔphysicalÕ reality. In the same way when a laser(think human aaveform interferencepaersion of the subject is projected intoapparently ÔsolidÕ reality (Fig 16). An amazing trait of hologramsreveals more Ôparanormal mysteriesÕ. Information of the whole hologram is encoded in waveform in every part of the interferencepaay they are created. This means that every part of ahologram is a smaller version of the whole. Cut the interferencewave-paou wonÕt get four parts of the image.You get quarter-sized versions of the whole image. The body is ahologram and the same applies. Here we have the basis ofacupuncture, reßexology and other forms of healing which identifyrepresentations of the whole body in all of the parts, hands, feet,ears, everywhere. Skilled palm readers can do what they do becausethe information of whole body is encoded in the hand. The conceptof as above, so below, comes from this.


The question will be asked of why, if solidity is illusory, we canÕtjust walk through walls and each other. The resistance is not solidagainst solid; it is electromagnetic Þeld against electromagnetic Þeldand we decode this into the experience of solid against solid. Weshould also not underestimate the power of belief to dictate reality.What you believe is impossible will be. Your belief impacts on yourdecoding processes and they wonÕt decode what you think isimpossible. What we believe we perceive and what we perceive weexperience. ÔCanÕt dosÕ and ÔimpossiblesÕ are like a Þrewall in acomputer system that wonÕt put on the screen what the Þrewallblocks. How vital that is to understanding how human experiencehas been h.acked. I explain in The Answer, Everything You Need To Know But Have Never Been Told and other books a long list ofÔmysteriesÕ and ÔparanormalÕ phenomena that are not mysteriousand perfectly normal once you realise what reality is and how itworks. ÔGhostsÕ can be seen to pass through ÔsolidÕ walls because thewalls are not solid and the ghost is a discarnate entity operating on afrequency so di.erent to that of the wall that itÕs like two radiostations sharing the same space while never interfering with eachother. I have seen ghosts do this myself. The apartness of people andobjects is also an illusion. Everything is connected by the Field likeall sea life is connected by the sea. ItÕs just that within the limits ofour visual reality we only ÔseeÕ holographic information and not theÞeld of information that connects everything and from which theholographic world is made manifest. If you can only see holographicÔobjectsÕ and not the Þeld that connects them they will appear to youas unconnected to each other in the same way that we see thecomputer while not seeing the Wi-Fi.
What you donÕt know can hurt you 
Okay, we return to those Ôtwo worldsÕ of human society and the Cultwith its global network of interconnecting secret societies andsatanic groups which manipulate through governments,corporations, media, religions, etc. The fundamental di.erencebetween them is knowledge. The idea has been to keep humanityignorant of the plan for its total enslavement underpinned by acrucial ignorance of reality Ð who we are and where we are Ð andhow we interact with it. ÔHumanÕ should be the interaction betweenour expanded eternal consciousness and the Þve-sense bodyexperience. We are meant to be in this world in terms of the Þvesenses but not of this world in relation to our greater consciousnessand perspective. In that state we experience the small picture of theÞve senses within the wider context of the big picture of awarenessbeyond the Þve senses. Put another way the Þve senses see the dotsand expanded awareness connects them into pictures and pathat give context to the apparently random and unconnected.Without the context of expanded awareness the Þve senses see onlyapartness and randomness with apparently no meaning. The Cultand its other-dimensional controllers seek to intervene in thefrequency realm where Þve-sense reality is supposed to connect withexpanded reality and to keep the two apart (more on this in the Þnalchapter). When that happens Þve-sense mental and emotionalprocesses are no longer inßuenced by expanded awareness, or theTrue ÔIÕ, and instead are driven by the isolated perceptions of thebodyÕs decoding systems. They are in the world and of it. Here wehave the human plight and why humanity with its potential forinÞnite awareness can be so easily manipulatable and descend intosuch extremes of stupidity.
Once the Cult isolates Þve-sense mind from expanded awarenessit can then program the mind with perceptions and beliefs bycontrolling information that the mind receives through theÔeducationÕ system of the formative years and the media perceptualbombardment and censorship of an entire lifetime. Limit perceptionand a sense of the possible through limiting knowledge by limitingand skewing information while censoring and discrediting thatwhich could set people free. As the title of another of my books saysÉ And The Truth Shall Set You Free. For this reason the last thing theCult wants in circulation is the truth about anything Ð especially thereality of the eternal ÔIÕ Ð and thatÕs why it is desperate to controlinformation. The Cult knows that information becomes perceptionwhich becomes behaviour which, collectively, becomes humansociety. Cult-controlled and funded mainstream ÔscienceÕ denies theexistence of an eternal ÔIÕ and seeks to dismiss and trash all evidenceto the contrary. Cult-controlled mainstream religion has a version ofÔGodÕ that is lithat employs threats of damnation in an aerlife to controlperceptions and behaviour in the here and now through fear andguilt. Neither is true and itÕs the ÔneitherÕ that the Cult wishes tosuppress. This ÔneitherÕ is that everything is an expression, a point ofameaning of the term ÔGodÕ.
Perceptual obsession with the Ôphysical bodyÕ and Þve-sensesmeans that ÔGodÕ becomes personiÞed as a bearded bloke siamong the clouds or a raging bully who loves us if we do what ÔheÕwants and condemns us to the Þres of hell if we donÕt. These are nomore than a ÔspiritualÕ fairy tales to control and dictate events andbehaviour through fear of this ÔGodÕ which has bizarrely made ÔGod.fearingÕ in religious circles a state to be desired. I would suggest thatfearing anything is not to be encouraged and celebrated, but ratherdeleted. You can see why ÔGod fearingÕ is so beneÞcial to the Cultand its religions when they decide what ÔGodÕ wants and what ÔGodÕdemands (the Cult demands) that everyone do. As the greatAmerican comedian Bill Hicks said satirising a Christian zealot: ÔIthink what God meant to say.Õ How much of this inÞnite awareness(ÔGodÕ) that we access is decided by how far we choose to expandour perceptions, self-identity and sense of the possible. The scale ofself-identity reßects itself in the scale of awareness that we canconnect with and are inßuenced by Ð how much knowing andinsight we have instead of programmed perception. You cannotexpand your awareness into the inÞnity of possibility when youbelieve that you are lieter the postman or Mary in marketingand nothing more. IÕll deal with this in the concluding chapterbecause itÕs crucial to how we turnaround current events.
Where the Cult came from 
When I realised in the early 1990s there was a Cult network behindglobal events I asked the obvious question: When did it start? I tookit back to ancient Rome and Egypt and on to Babylon and Sumer inMesopotamia, the ÔLand Between Two RiversÕ, in what we now callIraq. The two rivers are the Tigris and Euphrates and this region is ofimmense historical and other importance to the Cult, as is the landcalled Israel only 550 miles away by air. There is much more goingwith deep esoteric meaning across this whole region. ItÕs not onlyabout Ôwars for oilÕ. Priceless artefacts from Mesopotamia werestolen or destroyed aer the American and British invasion of Iraq in2003 justiÞed by the lies of Boy Bush and Tony Blair (their Cultmasters) about non-existent Ôweapons of mass destructionÕ.Mesopotamia was the location of Sumer (about 5,400BC to 1,750BC),and Babylon (about 2,350BC to 539BC). Sabbatians may have becomeimmensely inßuential in the Cult in modern times but they are partof a network that goes back into the mists of history. Sumer is said byhistorians to be the Ôcradle of civilisationÕ. I disagree. I say it was there-start of what we call human civilisation aer cataclysmic eventssymbolised in part as the ÔGreat FloodÕ destroyed the world thatexisted before. These fantastic upheavals that I have been describingin detail in the books since the early1990s appear in accounts andlegends of ancient cultures across the world and they are supportedby geological and biological evidence. Stone tablets found in Iraqdetailing the Sumer period say the cataclysms were caused by non.human ÔgodsÕ they call the Anunnaki. These are described in termsof extraterrestrial visitations in which knowledge supplied by theAnunnaki is said to have been the source of at least one of theworldÕs oldest writing systems and developments in astronomy,mathematics and architecture that were way ahead of their time. Ihave covered this subject at length in The Biggest Secret and Children of the Matrix and the same basic ÔAnunnakiÕ story can be found inZulu accounts in South Africa where the late and very great Zuluhigh shaman Credo Mutwa told me that the Sumerian Anunnakiwere known by Zulus as the Chitauri or Ôchildren of the serpentÕ. Seemy six-hour video interview with Credo on this subject entitled The Reptilian Agenda recorded at his then home near Johannesburg in1999 which you can watch on the Ickonic media platform.
The Cult emerged out of Sumer, Babylon and Egypt (andelsewhere) and established the Roman Empire before expandingwith the Romans into northern Europe from where many empireswere savagely imposed in the form of Cult-controlled societies allover the world. Mass death and destruction was their calling card.The Cult established its centre of operations in Europe and EuropeanEmpires were Cult empires which allowed it to expand into a globalforce. Spanish and Portuguese colonialists headed for Central andSouth America while the British and French targeted North America.Africa was colonised by Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands,Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Germany. Some like Britain and Francemoved in on the Middle East. The British Empire was by far thebiggest for a simple reason. By now Britain was the headquarters ofthe Cult from which it expanded to form Canada, the United States,Australia and New Zealand. The Sun never set on the British Empiresuch was the scale of its occupation. London remains a global centrefor the Cult along with Rome and the Vatican although others haveemerged in Israel and China. It is no accident that the ÔvirusÕ isalleged to have come out of China while Italy was chosen as themeans to terrify the Western population into compliance withÔCovidÕ fascism. Nor that Israel has led the world in ÔCovidÕ fascismand mass ÔvaccinationÕ.
You would think that I would mention the United States here, butwhile it has been an important means of imposing the CultÕs will it isless signiÞcant than would appear and is currently in the process ofhaving what power it does have deleted. The Cult in Europe hasmostly loaded the guns for the US to Þre. America has beencontrolled from Europe from the start through Cult operatives inBritain and Europe. The American Revolution was an illusion tomake it appear that America was governing itself while verydi.erent forces were pulling the strings in the form of Cult familiessuch as the Rothschilds through the Rockefellers and othersubordinates. The Rockefellers are extremely close to Bill Gates andestablished both scalpel and drug ÔmedicineÕ and the World HealthOrganization. They play a major role in the development andcirculation of vaccines through the Rockefeller Foundation on whichBill Gates said his Foundation is based. Why wouldnÕt this be thecase when the Rockefellers and Gates are on the same team? CultinÞltration of human society goes way back into what we call historyand has been constantly expanding and centralising power with thegoal of establishing a global structure to dictate everything. Lookhow this has been advanced in great leaps with the ÔCovidÕ hoax.
The non-human dimension 
I researched and observed the comings and goings of Cult operativesthrough the centuries and even thousands of years as they wereborn, worked to promote the agenda within the secret society andsatanic networks, and then died for others to replace them. Clearlythere had to be a coordinating force that spanned this entire periodwhile operatives who would not have seen the end goal in theirlifetimes came and went advancing the plan over millennia. I wentin search of that coordinating force with the usual support from theextraordinary synchronicity of my life which has been an almostdaily experience since 1990. I saw common themes in religious textsand ancient cultures about a non-human force manipulating humansociety from the hidden. Christianity calls this force Satan, the Deviland demons; Islam refers to the Jinn or Djinn; Zulus have theirChitauri (spelt in other ways in di.erent parts of Africa); and theGnostic people in Egypt in the period around and before 400ADreferred to this phenomena as the ÔArchonsÕ, a word meaning rulersin Greek. Central American cultures speak of the ÔPredatorsÕ amongother names and the same theme is everywhere. I will use ÔArchonsÕas a collective name for all of them. When you see how their natureand behaviour is described all these di.erent sources are clearlytalking about the same force. Gnostics described the Archons interms of Ôluminous ÞreÕ while Islam relates the Jinn to ÔsmokelessÞreÕ. Some refer to beings in form that could occasionally be seen,but the most common of common theme is that they operate fromunseen realms which means almost all existence to the visualprocesses of humans. I had concluded that this was indeed thefoundation of human control and that the Cult was operating withinthe human frequency band on behalf of this hidden force when Icame across the writings of Gnostics which supported myconclusions in the most extraordinary way.
A sealed earthen jar was found in 1945 near the town of NagHammadi about 75-80 miles north of Luxor on the banks of the RiverNile in Egypt. Inside was a treasure trove of manuscripts and textsle by the Gnostic people some 1,600 years earlier. They included 13leather-bound papyrus codices (manuscripts) and more than 50 textswrie been hidden in the jarin the period of 400AD although the source of the information goesback much further. Gnostics oversaw the Great or Royal Library ofAlexandria, the fantastic depository of ancient texts detailingadvanced knowledge and accounts of human history. The Librarywas dismantled and destroyed in stages over a long period with thedeath-blow delivered by the Cult-established Roman Church in theperiod around 415AD. The Church of Rome was the Church ofBabylon relocated as I said earlier. Gnostics were not a race. Theywere a way of perceiving reality. Whenever they establishedthemselves and their information circulated the terrorists of theChurch of Rome would target them for destruction. This happenedwith the Great Library and with the Gnostic Cathars who wereburned to death by the psychopaths aer a long period ofoppression at the siege of the Castle of MonsŽgur in southern Francein 1244. The Church has always been terriÞed of Gnostic informationwhich demolishes the o.cial Christian narrative although there ismuch in the Bible that supports the Gnostic view if you read it inanother way. To anyone studying the texts of what became known asthe Nag Hammadi Library it is clear that great swathes of Christianand Biblical belief has its origin with Gnostics sources going back toSumer. Gnostic themes have been twisted to manipulate theperceived reality of Bible believers. Biblical texts have been in theopen for centuries where they could be changed while Gnosticdocuments found at Nag Hammadi were sealed away anduntouched for 1,600 years. What you see is what they wrote.
Use your pneuma not your nous 
Gnosticism and Gnostic come from ÔgnosisÕ which meansknowledge, or rather secret knowledge, in the sense of spiritualawareness Ð knowledge about reality and life itself. The desperationof the CultÕs Church of Rome to destroy the Gnostics can beunderstood when the knowledge they were circulating was the lastthing the Cult wanted the population to know. Sixteen hundredyears later the same Cult is working hard to undermine and silenceme for the same reason. The dynamic between knowledge andignorance is a constant. ÔTimeÕ appears to move on, but essentialthemes remain the same. We are told to Ôuse your nousÕ, a Gnosticword for head/brain/intelligence. They said, however, that spiritualawakening or ÔsalvationÕ could only be secured by expandingawareness beyond what they called nous and into pneuma or InÞniteSelf. Obviously as I read these texts the parallels with what I havebeen saying since 1990 were fascinating to me. There is a universaltruth that spans human history and in that case why wouldnÕt we betalking the same language 16 centuries apart? When you freeyourself from the perception program of the Þve senses and exploreexpanded realms of consciousness you are going to connect with thesame information no maed ÔeraÕ within amanufactured timeline of a single and tiny range of manipulatedfrequency. Humans working with ÔsmartÕ technology or knockingrocks together in caves is only a timeline appearing to operate withinthe human frequency band. Expanded awareness and theknowledge it holds have always been there whether the era be StoneAge or computer age. We can only access that knowledge byopening ourselves to its frequency which the Þve-sense prison cell isdesigned to stop us doing. Gates, Fauci, Whi, Vallance,Zuckerberg, Brin, Page, Wojcicki, Bezos, and all the others behindthe ÔCovidÕ hoax clearly have a long wait before their range offrequency can make that connection given that an open heart iscrucial to that as we shall see. Instead of accessing knowledgedirectly through expanded awareness it is given to Cult operativesby the secret society networks of the Cult where it has been passedon over thousands of years outside the public arena. Expandedrealms of consciousness is where great artists, composers andwriters Þnd their inspiration and where truth awaits anyone openenough to connect with it. We need to go there fast.
Archon hijack 
A Þh of the Nag Hammadi texts describe the existence andmanipulation of the Archons led by a ÔChief ArchonÕ they callÔYaldabaothÕ, or the ÔDemiurgeÕ, and this is the Christian ÔDevilÕ,ÔSatanÕ, ÔLuciferÕ, and his demons. Archons in Biblical symbolism arethe Ôfallen onesÕ which are also referred to as fallen angels aer theangels expelled from heaven according to the Abrahamic religions ofJudaism, Christianity and Islam. These angels are claimed to tempthumans to ÔsinÕ ongoing and you will see how accurate thatsymbolism is during the rest of the book. The theme of Ôoriginal sinÕis related to the ÔFallÕ when Adam and Eve were Ôtempted by theserpentÕ and fell from a state of innocence and ÔobedienceÕ(connection) with God into a state of disobedience (disconnection).The Fall is said to have brought sin into the world and corruptedeverything including human nature. Yaldabaoth, the ÔLord ArchonÕ,is described by Gnostics as a Ôcounterfeit spiritÕ, ÔThe Blind OneÕ,ÔThe Blind GodÕ, and ÔThe Foolish OneÕ. The Jewish name forYaldabaoth in Talmudic writings is Samael which translates asÔPoison of GodÕ, or ÔBlindness of GodÕ. You see the parallels.Yaldabaoth in Islamic belief is the Muslim Jinn devil known asShaytan Ð Shaytan is Satan as the same themes are found all over theworld in every religion and culture. The ÔLord GodÕ of the OldTestament is the ÔLord ArchonÕ of Gnostic manuscripts and thatÕswhy heÕs such a bloodthirsty bastard. Satan is known by Christiansas Ôthe Demon of DemonsÕ and Gnostics called Yaldabaoth theÔArchon of ArchonsÕ. Both are known as ÔThe DeceiverÕ. We aretalking about the same ÔblokeÕ for sure and these common themesusing di.erent names, storylines and symbolism tell a common taleof the human plight.
Archons are referred to in Nag Hammadi documents as mindparasites, inverters, guards, gatekeepers, detainers, judges, pitilessones and deceivers. The ÔCovidÕ hoax alone is a glaring example ofall these things. The Biblical ÔGodÕ is so di.erent in the Old and NewTestaments because they are not describing the same phenomenon.The vindictive, angry, hate-Þlled, ÔGodÕ of the Old Testament, knownas Yahweh, is Yaldabaoth who is depicted in Cult-dictated popularculture as the ÔDark LordÕ, ÔLord of TimeÕ, Lord (Darth) Vader andDormammu, the evil ruler of the ÔDark DimensionÕ trying to takeover the ÔEarth DimensionÕ in the Marvel comic movie, Dr Strange.Yaldabaoth is both the Old Testament ÔgodÕ and the Biblical ÔSatanÕ.Gnostics referred to Yaldabaoth as the ÔGreat Architect of theUniverseÕand the Cult-controlled Freemason network calls their godÔthe ÔGreat Architect of the UniverseÕ (also Grand Architect). TheÔGreat ArchitectÕ Yaldabaoth is symbolised by the Cult as the all-seeing eye at the top of the pyramid on the Great Seal of the UnitedStates and the dollar bill. Archon is encoded in arch-itect as it is inarch-angels and arch-bishops. All religions have the theme of a forcefor good and force for evil in some sort of spiritual war and there is areason for that Ð the theme is true. The Cult and its non-humanmasters are quite happy for this to circulate. They presentthemselves as the force for good Þghting evil when they are reallythe force of evil (absence of love). The whole foundation of Cultmodus operandi is inversion. They promote themselves as a force forgood and anyone challenging them in pursuit of peace, love,fairness, truth and justice is condemned as a satanic force for evil.This has been the game plan throughout history whether the Churchof Rome inquisitions of non-believers or Ôconspiracy theoristsÕ andÔanti-vaxxersÕ of today. The technique is the same whatever thetimeline era.
Yaldabaoth is revolting (true) 
Yaldabaoth and the Archons are said to have revolted against Godwith Yaldabaoth claiming to be God Ð the All That Is. The OldTestament ÔGodÕ (Yaldabaoth) demanded to be worshipped as such: ÔI am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside meÕ(Isaiah 45:5). I have quoted in other books a man who said he wasthe uno.cial son of the late Baron Philippe de Rothschild of theMouton-Rothschild wine producing estates in France who died in1988 and he told me about the Rothschild Ôrevolt from GodÕ. Theman said he was given the name Phillip Eugene de Rothschild andwe shared long correspondence many years ago while he was livingunder another identity. He said that he was conceived throughÔoccult incestÕ which (within the Cult) was Ônormal and to beadmiredÕ. ÔPhillipÕ told me about his experience arituals with rich and famous people whom he names and you cansee them and the wider background to Cult Satanism in my otherbooks starting with The Biggest Secret. Cult rituals are interactionswith Archontic ÔgodsÕ. ÔPhillipÕ described Baron Philippe deRothschild as Ôa master Satanist and hater of GodÕ and he used thesame term Ôrevolt from GodÕ associated withYaldabaoth/Satan/Lucifer/the Devil in describing the SabbatianRothschild dynasty. ÔI played a key role in my familyÕs revolt fromGodÕ, he said. That role was to inÞltrate in classic Sabbatian style theChristian Church, but eventually he escaped the mind-prison to liveanother life. The Cult has been targeting religion in a plan to makeworship of the Archons the global one-world religion. InÞltration ofSatanism into modern ÔcultureÕ, especially among the young,through music videos, stage shows and other means, is all part ofthis.
Nag Hammadi texts describe Yaldabaoth and the Archons in theirprime form as energy Ð consciousness Ð and say they can take form ifthey choose in the same way that consciousness takes form as ahuman. Yaldabaoth is called ÔformlessÕ and represents a deeplyinverted, distorted and chaotic state of consciousness which seeks toaahumans into low frequency mental and emotional states that matchits own. Archons can certainly appear in human form and this is theorigin of the psychopathic personality. The energetic distortionGnostics called Yaldabaoth is psychopathy. When psychopathicArchons take human form that human will be a psychopath as anexpression of Yaldabaoth consciousness. Cult psychopaths areArchons in human form. The principle is the same as that portrayedin the 2009 Avatar movie when the American military travelled to aÞctional Earth-like moon called Pandora in the Alpha Centauri starsystem to inÞltrate a society of blue people, or NaÕvi, by hidingwithin bodies that looked like the NaÕvi. Archons posing as humanshave a particular hybrid information Þeld, part human, part Archon,(the ancient ÔdemigodsÕ) which processes information in a way thatmanifests behaviour to match their psychopathic evil, lack ofempathy and compassion, and stops them being inßuenced by theempathy, compassion and love that a fully-human information Þeldis capable of expressing. Cult bloodlines interbreed, be they royaltyor dark suits, for this reason and you have their obsession withincest. Interbreeding with full-blown humans would dilute theArchontic energy Þeld that guarantees psychopathy in itsrepresentatives in the human realm.
Gnostic writings say the main non-human forms that Archonstake are serpentine (what I have called for decades ÔreptilianÕ amidunbounded ridicule from the Archontically-programmed) and whatGnostics describe as Ôan unborn baby or foetus with grey skin anddark, unmoving eyesÕ. This is an excellent representation of the ETÔGreysÕ of UFO folklore which large numbers of people claim to haveseen and been abducted by Ð Zulu shaman Credo Mutwa amongthem. I agree with those that believe in extraterrestrial orinterdimensional visitations today and for thousands of years past.No wonder with their advanced knowledge and technologicalcapability they were perceived and worshipped as gods fortechnological and other ÔmiraclesÕ they appeared to perform.Imagine someone arriving in a culture disconnected from themodern world with a smartphone and computer. They would beseen as a ÔgodÕ capable of ÔmiraclesÕ. The Renegade Mind, however,wants to know the source of everything and not only the way thatsource manifests as human or non-human. In the same way that aRenegade Mind seeks the original source material for the ÔCovidvirusÕ to see if what is claimed is true. The original source ofArchons in form is consciousness Ð the distorted state ofconsciousness known to Gnostics as Yaldabaoth.
ÔRevolt from GodÕ is energetic disconnection 
Where I am going next will make a lot of sense of religious texts andancient legends relating to ÔSatanÕ, LuciferÕ and the ÔgodsÕ. Gnosticdescriptions sync perfectly with the themes of my own research overthe years in how they describe a consciousness distortion seeking toimpose itself on human consciousness. IÕve referred to the core ofinÞnite awareness in previous books as InÞnite Awareness inAwareness of Itself. By that I mean a level of awareness that knowsthat it is all awareness and is aware of all awareness. From herecomes the frequency of love in its true sense and balance which iswhat love is on one level Ð the balance of all forces into a singlewhole called Oneness and Isness. The more we disconnect from thisstate of love that many call ÔGodÕ the constituent parts of thatOneness start to unravel and express themselves as a part and not awhole. They become individualised as intellect, mind, selÞshness,hatred, envy, desire for power over others, and such like. This is nota problem in the greater scheme in that ÔGodÕ, the All That Is, canexperience all these possibilities through di.erent expressions ofitself including humans. What we as expressions of the wholeexperience the All That Is experiences. We are the All That Is experiencing itself. As we withdraw from that state of Oneness wedisconnect from its inßuence and things can get very unpleasant andvery stupid. Archontic consciousness is at the extreme end of that. Ithas so disconnected from the inßuence of Oneness that it has becomean inversion of unity and love, an inversion of everything, aninversion of life itself. Evil is appropriately live wriards.Archontic consciousness is obsessed with death, an inversion of life,and so its manifestations in Satanism are obsessed with death. Theyuse inverted symbols in their rituals such as the inverted pentagramand cross. Sabbatians as Archontic consciousness incarnate invertJudaism and every other religion and culture they inÞltrate. Theyseek disunity and chaos and they fear unity and harmony as theyfear love like garlic to a vampire. As a result the Cult, Archonsincarnate, act with such evil, psychopathy and lack of empathy andcompassion disconnected as they are from the source of love. Howcould Bill Gates and the rest of the Archontic psychopaths do whatthey have to human society in the ÔCovidÕ era with all the death,su.ering and destruction involved and have no emotionalconsequence for the impact on others? Now you know. Why haveZuckerberg, Brin, Page, Wojcicki and company callously censoredinformation warning about the dangers of the ÔvaccineÕ whilethousands have been dying and having severe, sometimes life-changing reactions? Now you know. Why have Tedros, Fauci,Whi, Vallance and their like around the world been using case anddeath Þgures theyÕre aware are fraudulent to justify lockdowns andall the deaths and destroyed lives that have come from that? Nowyou know. Why did Christian Drosten produce and promote aÔtestingÕ protocol that he knew couldnÕt test for infectious diseasewhich led to a global human catastrophe. Now you know. TheArchontic mind doesnÕt give a shit (Fig 17). I personally think thatGates and major Cult insiders are a form of AI cyborg that theArchons want humans to become.

Human batteries 
A state of such inversion does have its consequences, however. Thelevel of disconnection from the Source of All means that youwithdraw from that source of energetic sustenance and creativity.This means that you have to Þnd your own supply of energeticpower and it has Ð us. When the Morpheus character in the ÞrstMatrix movie held up a basaid: ÔThe Matrix is a computer-generated dream world built to keepus under control in order to change the human being into one ofthese.Õ The statement was true in all respects. We do live in atechnologically-generated virtual reality simulation (more veryshortly) and we have been manipulated to be an energy source forArchontic consciousness. The Disney-Pixar animated movieMonsters, Inc. in 2001 symbolised the dynamic when monsters intheir world had no energy source and they would enter the humanworld to terrify children in their beds, catch the childÕs scream, terror(low-vibrational frequencies), and take that energy back to powerthe monster world. The lead character you might remember was asingle giant eye and the symbolism of the CultÕs all-seeing eye wasobvious. Every thought and emotion is broadcast as a frequencyunique to that thought and emotion. Feelings of love and joy,empathy and compassion, are high, quick, frequencies while fear,depression, anxiety, su.ering and hate are low, slow, densefrequencies. Which kind do you think Archontic consciousness canconnect with and absorb? In such a low and dense frequency statethereÕs no way it can connect with the energy of love and joy.Archons can only feed o. energy compatible with their ownfrequency and they and their Cult agents want to delete the humanworld of love and joy and manipulate the transmission of lowvibrational frequencies through low-vibrational human mental andemotional states. We are their energy source. Wars are energeticbanquets to the Archons Ð a world war even more so Ð and thinkhow much low-frequency mental and emotional energy has beengenerated from the consequences for humanity of the ÔCovidÕ hoaxorchestrated by Archons incarnate like Gates.
The ancient practice of human sacriÞce Ôto the godsÕ, continued insecret today by the Cult, is based on the same principle. ÔThe godsÕare Archontic consciousness in di.erent forms and the sacriÞce isinduced into a state of intense terror to generate the energy theArchontic frequency can absorb. Incarnate Archons in the ritualdrink the blood which contains an adrenaline they crave whichßoods into the bloodstream when people are terrorised. Most of thesacriÞces, ancient and modern, are children and the theme ofÔsacriÞcing young virgins to the godsÕ is just code for children. Theyhave a particular pre-puberty energy that Archons want more thananything and the energy of the young in general is their target. TheCalifornia Department of Education wants students to chant thenames of Aztec gods (Archontic gods) once worshipped in humansacriÞce rituals in a curriculum designed to encourage them toÔchallenge racist, bigoted, discriminatory, imperialist/colonialbeliefsÕ, join Ôsocial movements that struggle for social justiceÕ, andÔbuild new possibilities for a post-racist, post-systemic racismsocietyÕ. ItÕs the usual Woke crap that inverts racism and calls it anti-racism. In this case solidarity with Ôindigenous tribesÕ is being usedas an excuse to chant the names of ÔgodsÕ to which people weresacriÞced (and still are in secret). What an example of WokeÕsinability to see beyond black and white, us and them, They condemnthe colonisation of these tribal cultures by Europeans (quite right),but those cultures sacriÞcing people including children to theirÔgodsÕ, and mass murdering untold numbers as the Aztecs did, isjust Þne. One chant is to the Aztec god Tezcatlipoca who had a mansacriÞced to him in the 5th month of the Aztec calendar. His heartwas cut out and he was eaten. Oh, thatÕs okay then. Come onchildren É aer three É Other sacriÞcial ÔgodsÕ for the young tochant their allegiance include Quetzalcoatl, Huitzilopochtli and XipeTotec. The curriculum says that Ôchants, a.rmations, and energizerscan be used to bring the class together, build unity around ethnicstudies principles and values, and to reinvigorate the class followinga lesson that may be emotionally taxing or even when studentengagement may appear to be lowÕ. Well, thatÕs the cover story,anyway. Chanting and mantras are the repetition of a particularfrequency generated from the vocal cords and chanting the names ofthese Archontic ÔgodsÕ tunes you into their frequency. That is the lastthing you want when it allows for energetic synchronisation,atheir ÔGodsÕ in their rituals for this very reason.
Vampires of the Woke 
Paedophilia is another way that Archons absorb the energy ofchildren. Paedophiles possessed by Archontic consciousness areused as the conduit during sexual abuse for discarnate Archons tovampire the energy of the young they desire so much. Stupendousnumbers of children disappear every year never to be seen againalthough you would never know from the media. Imagine howmuch low-vibrational energy has been generated by children duringthe ÔCovidÕ hoax when so many have become depressed andpsychologically destroyed to the point of killing themselves.Shocking numbers of children are now taken by the state fromloving parents to be handed to others. I can tell you from longexperience of researching this since 1996 that many end up withpaedophiles and assets of the Cult through corrupt and Cult-ownedsocial services which in the reframing era has hired manypsychopaths and emotionless automatons to do the job. Children areeven stolen to order using spurious reasons to take them by thecorrupt and secret (because theyÕre corrupt) Ôfamily courtsÕ. I havewriThe Biggest Secret in1997, about the ubiquitous connections between the political,corporate, government, intelligence and military elites (Cultoperatives) and Satanism and paedophilia. If you go deep enoughboth networks have an interlocking leadership. The Woke mentalityhas been developed by the Cult for many reasons: To promotealmost every aspect of its agenda; to h.ack the traditional politicalle and turn it fascist; to divide and rule; and to target agendapushbackers. But there are other reasons which relate to what I amdescribing here. How many happy and joyful Wokers do you eversee especially at the extreme end? They are a mental andpsychological mess consumed by emotional stress and constantlyemotionally cocked for the next explosion of indignation at someonereferring to a female as a female. They are walking, talking, baas Morpheus might say emiethem in low-vibrational bubbles of perceptual limitation and feedthe Archons. Add to this the hatred claimed to be love; fascismclaimed to Ôanti-fascismÕ, racism claimed to be Ôanti-racismÕ;exclusion claimed to inclusion; and the abuse-Þlled Internet trolling.You have a purpose-built Archontic energy system with not a windturbine in sight and all founded on Archontic inversion. We havewhole generations now manipulated to serve the Archons with theiractions and energy. They will be doing so their entire adult livesunless they snap out of their Archon-induced trance. Is it really asurprise that Cult billionaires and corporations put so much moneytheir way? Where is the energy of joy and laughter, includinglaughing at yourself which is conÞrmation of your own emotionalsecurity? Mark Twain said: ÔThe human race has one really e.ectiveweapon, and that is laughter.Ô We must use it all the time. Woke hasdestroyed comedy because it has no humour, no joy, sense of irony,or self-deprecation. Its energy is dense and intense. Mmmmm, lunchsays the Archontic frequency. Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925) was theAustrian philosopher and famous esoteric thinker who establishedWaldorf education or Steiner schools to treat children like uniqueexpressions of consciousness and not minds to be programmed withthe perceptions determined by authority. IÕd been writing about thisenergy vampiring for decades when I was sent in 2016 a quote bySteiner. He was spot on:
There are beings in the spiritual realms for whom anxiety and fear emanating from human beings offer welcome food. When humans have no anxiety and fear, then these creatures starve. If fear and anxiety radiates from people and they break out in panic, then these creatures find welcome nutrition and they become more and more powerful. These beings are hostile towards humanity. Everything that feeds on negative feelings, on anxiety, fear and superstition, despair or doubt, are in reality hostile forces in super-sensible worlds, launching cruel attacks on human beings, while they are being fed ... These are exactly the feelings that belong to contemporary culture and materialism; because it estranges people from the spiritual world, it is especially suited to evoke hopelessness and fear of the unknown in people, thereby calling up the above mentioned hostile forces against them. 
Pause for a moment from this perspective and reßect on what hashappened in the world since the start of 2020. Not only will penniesdrop, but billion dollar bills. We see the same theme from Don JuanMatus, a Yaqui Indian shaman in Mexico and the information sourcefor Peruvian-born writer, Carlos Castaneda, who wrote a series ofbooks from the 1960s to 1990s. Don Juan described the forcemanipulating human society and his name for the Archons was thepredator:
We have a predator that came from the depths of the cosmos and took over the rule of our lives. Human beings are its prisoners. The predator is our lord and master. It has rendered us docile, helpless. If we want to protest, it suppresses our protest. If we want to act independently, it demands that we donÕt do so ... indeed we are held prisoner! 
They took us over because we are food to them, and they squeeze us mercilessly because we are their sustenance. Just as we rear chickens in coops, the predators rear us in human coops, humaneros. Therefore, their food is always available to them. 
Different cultures, different eras, same recurring theme. 
The ÔennoiaÕ dilemma 
Nag Hammadi Gnostic manuscripts say that Archon consciousnesshas no ÔennoiaÕ. This is directly translated as ÔintentionalityÕ, but IÕlluse the term Ôcreative imaginationÕ. The All That Is in awareness ofitself is the source of all creativity Ð all possibility Ð and the moredisconnected you are from that source the more you aresubsequently denied Ôcreative imaginationÕ. Given that Archonconsciousness is almost entirely disconnected it severely lackscreativity and has to rely on far more mechanical processes ofthought and exploit the creative potential of those that do haveÔennoiaÕ. You can see cases of this throughout human society. Archonconsciousness almost entirely dominates the global banking systemand if we study how that system works you will appreciate what Imean. Banks manifest ÔmoneyÕ out of nothing by issuing lines ofÔcreditÕ which is ÔmoneyÕ that has never, does not, and will neverexist except in theory. ItÕs a conÞdence trick. If you think ÔcreditÕÞgures-on-a-screen ÔmoneyÕ is worth anything you accept it aspayment. If you donÕt then the whole system collapses through lackof conÞdence in the value of that ÔmoneyÕ. Archontic bankers withno ÔennoiaÕ are ÔlendingÕ ÔmoneyÕ that doesnÕt exist to humans that do have creativity Ð those that have the inspired ideas and createbusinesses and products. Archon banking feeds o. human creativitywhich it controls through ÔmoneyÕ creation and debt. Humans havethe creativity and Archons exploit that for their own beneÞt andcontrol while having none themselves. Archon Internet platformslike Facebook claim joint copyright of everything that creative userspost and while Archontic minds like Zuckerberg may o.cially headthat company it will be human creatives on the sta. that provide thecreative inspiration. When you have limitless ÔmoneyÕ you can thenbuy other companies established by creative humans. Witness theacquisition record of Facebook, Google and their like. Survey theArchon-controlled music industry and you see non-creative darksuit executives making their fortune from the human creativity oftheir artists. The cases are endless. Research the history of peoplelike Gates and Zuckerberg and how their empires were built onexploiting the creativity of others. Archon minds cannot create out ofnothing, but they are skilled (because they have to be) in whatGnostic texts call ÔcountermimicryÕ. They can imitate, but notinnovate. Sabbatians trawl the creativity of others throughbackdoors they install in computer systems through theircybersecurity systems. Archon-controlled China is globally infamousfor stealing intellectual property and I remember how Hong Kong,now part of China, became notorious for making counterfeit copiesof the creativity of others Ð ÔcountermimicryÕ. With the nowpervasive and all-seeing surveillance systems able to inÞltrate anycomputer you can appreciate the potential for Archons to vampirethe creativity of humans. Author John Lamb Lash wrote in his bookabout the Nag Hammadi texts, Not In His Image:
Although they cannot originate anything, because they lack the divine factor of ennoia (intentionality), Archons can imitate with a vengeance. Their expertise is simulation (HAL, virtual reality). The Demiurge [Yaldabaoth] fashions a heaven world copied from the fractal patterns [of the original] ... His construction is celestial kitsch, like the fake Italianate villa of a Mafia don complete with militant angels to guard every portal. 
This brings us to something that I have been speaking about sincethe turn of the millennium. Our reality is a simulation; a virtualreality that we think is real. No, IÕm not kidding.
Human reality? Well, virtually 
I had pondered for years about whether our reality is ÔrealÕ or somekind of construct. I remembered being immensely a.ected on a visitas a small child in the late 1950s to the then newly-openedPlanetarium on the Marylebone Road in London which is nowclosed and part of the adjacent Madame Tussauds wax museum. Itwas in the middle of the day, but when the lights went out there wasthe night sky projected in the PlanetariumÕs domed ceiling and itappeared to be so real. The experience never le me and I didnÕtknow why until around the turn of the millennium when I becamecertain that our Ônight skyÕ and entire reality is a projection, a virtualreality, akin to the illusory world portrayed in the Matrix movies. Ilooked at the sky one day in this period and it appeared to me likethe domed roof of the Planetarium. The release of the Þrst Matrix movie in 1999 also provided a synchronistic and perfect visualrepresentation of where my mind had been going for a long time. IhadnÕt come across the Gnostic Nag Hammadi texts then. When Idid years later the correlation was once again astounding. As I readGnostic accounts from 1,600 years and more earlier it was clear thatthey were describing the same simulation phenomenon. They tellhow the Yaldabaoth ÔDemiurgeÕ and Archons created a Ôbad copyÕ oforiginal reality to rule over all that were captured by its illusions andthe body was a prison to trap consciousness in the Ôbad copyÕ fakereality. Read how Gnostics describe the Ôbad copyÕ and update thatto current times and they are referring to what we would call today avirtual reality simulation.
Author John Lamb Lash said Ôthe Demiurge fashions a heavenworld copied from the fractal paexpertise in ÔHALÕ or virtual reality simulation. Fractal papart of the energetic information construct of our reality, a sort ofblueprint. If these paere copied in computer terms it wouldindeed give you a copy of a ÔnaturalÕ reality in a non-naturalfrequency and digital form. The principle is the same as making acopy of a website. The original website still exists, but now you canchange the copy version to make it whatever you like and it canbecome very di.erent to the original website. Archons have donethis with our reality, a synthetic copy of prime reality that still existsbeyond the frequency walls of the simulation. Trapped within theillusions of this synthetic Matrix, however, were and are humanconsciousness and other expressions of prime reality and this is whythe Archons via the Cult are seeking to make the human bodysynthetic and give us synthetic AI minds to complete the job ofturning the entire reality synthetic including what we perceive to bethe natural world. To quote Kurzweil: ÔNanobots will infuse all themaerything willbecome these intelligent creatures.Õ Yes, synthetic ÔcreaturesÕ just asÔCovidÕ and other genetically-manipulating ÔvaccinesÕ are designedto make the human body synthetic. From this perspective it isobvious why Archons and their Cult are so desperate to infusesynthetic material into every human with their ÔCovidÕ scam.
Let there be (electromagnetic) light 
Yaldabaoth, the force that created the simulation, or Matrix, makessense of the Gnostic reference to ÔThe Great ArchitectÕ and its use byCult Freemasonry as the name of its deity. The designer of the Matrixin the movies is called ÔThe ArchitectÕ and that trilogy is jam-packedwith symbolism relating to these subjects. I have contended for yearsthat the angry Old Testament God (Yaldabaoth) is the ÔGodÕ beingsymbolically ÔquotedÕ in the opening of Genesis as Ôcreating theworldÕ. This is not the creation of prime reality Ð itÕs the creation ofthe simulation. The Genesis ÔGodÕ says: ÔLet there be Light: and therewas light.Õ But what is this ÔLightÕ? I have said for decades that thespeed of light (186,000 miles per second) is not the fastest speedpossible as claimed by mainstream science and is in fact thefrequency walls or outer limits of the Matrix. You canÕt have a fastestor slowest anything within all possibility when everything ispossible. The human body is encoded to operate within the speed oflight or within the simulation and thus we see only the tiny frequencyband of visible light. Near-death experiencers who perceive realityoutside the body during temporary ÔdeathÕ describe a very di.erentform of light and this is supported by the Nag Hammadi texts.Prime reality beyond the simulation (ÔUpper AeonsÕ to the Gnostics)is described as a realm of incredible beauty, bliss, love and harmony
Ð a realm of Ôwatery lightÕ that is so powerful Ôthere are no shadowsÕ.Our false reality of Archon control, which Gnostics call the ÔLowerAeonsÕ, is depicted as a realm with a di.erent kind of ÔlightÕ anddescribed in terms of chaos, ÔHellÕ, Ôthe AbyssÕ and ÔOuter DarknessÕ,where trapped souls are tormented and manipulated by demons(relate that to the ÔCovidÕ hoax alone). The watery light theme can befound in near-death accounts and it is not the same as simulation ÔlightÕ which is electromagnetic or radiation light within the speed oflight Ð the ÔLower AeonsÕ. Simulation ÔlightÕ is the Ôluminous ÞreÕassociated by Gnostics with the Archons. The Bible refers toYaldabaoth as Ôthat old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, whichdeceiveth the whole worldÕ (Revelation 12:9). I think that making asimulated copy of prime reality (ÔcountermimicryÕ) and changing itdramatically while all the time manipulating humanity to believe itto be real could probably meet the criteria of deceiving the wholeworld. Then we come to the Cult god Lucifer Ð the Light Bringer.Lucifer is symbolic of Yaldabaoth, the bringer of radiation light thatforms the bad copy simulation within the speed of light. ÔHeÕ issymbolised by the lighted torch held by the Statue of Liberty and inthe name ÔIlluminatiÕ. Sabbatian-Frankism declares that Lucifer is thetrue god and Lucifer is the real god of Freemasonry honoured astheir ÔGreat or Grand Architect of the UniverseÕ (simulation).
I would emphasise, too, the way Archontic technologically-generated luminous Þre of radiation has deluged our environmentsince I was a kid in the 1950s and changed the nature of The Fieldwith which we constantly interact. Through that interactiontechnological radiation is changing us. The Smart Grid is designed tooperate with immense levels of communication power with 5Gexpanding across the world and 6G, 7G, in the process ofdevelopment. Radiation is the simulation and the Archonticmanipulation system. Why wouldnÕt the Archon Cult wish tounleash radiation upon us to an ever-greater extreme to formKurzweilÕs ÔcloudÕ? The plan for a synthetic human is related to theneed to cope with levels of radiation beyond even anything weÕveseen so far. Biological humans would not survive the scale ofradiation they have in their script. The Smart Grid is a technologicalsub-reality within the technological simulation to further disconnectÞve-sense perception from expanded consciousness. ItÕs atechnological prison of the mind.
Infusing the Ôspirit of darknessÕ 
A recurring theme in religion and native cultures is themanipulation of human genetics by a non-human force and mostfamously recorded as the biblical Ôsons of godÕ (the gods plural in theoriginal) who interbred with the daughters of men. The NagHammadi Apocryphon of John tells the same story this way:
He [Yaldabaoth] sent his angels [Archons/demons] to the daughters of men, that they might take some of them for themselves and raise offspring for their enjoyment. And at first they did not succeed. When they had no success, they gathered together again and they made a plan together ... And the angels changed themselves in their likeness into the likeness of their mates, filling them with the spirit of darkness, which they had mixed for them, and with evil ... And they took women and begot children out of the darkness according to the likeness of their spirit. 
Possession when a discarnate entity takes over a human body is anage-old theme and continues today. ItÕs very real and IÕve seen it.Satanic and secret society rituals can create an energetic environmentin which entities can ae heard many storiesof how people have changed their personality aer being initiatedeven into lower levels of the Freemasons. I have been inside threeFreemasonic temples, one at a public open day and two by justwalking in when there was no one around to stop me. They were inRyde, the town where I live, Birmingham, England, when I was witha group, and Boston, Massachuseenergetically Ð dark, dense, low-vibrational and sinister. Demonicaon. To them itÕs just a ritual to get in the Masons and do a bit of goodbusiness. In the far more extreme rituals of Satanism humanpossession is even more powerful and they are designed to makepossession possible. The hierarchy of the Cult is dictated by thepower and perceived status of the possessing Archon. In this waythe Archon hierarchy becomes the Cult hierarchy. Once the entityhas aainfuses into the body information Þeld that the hologram starts toreßect the nature of the possessing entity. This is the Exorcist movietype of possession when facial features change and itÕs known asshapeshiing. IslamÕs Jinn are said to be invisible tricksters whochange shape, ÔwhisperÕ, confuse and take human form. These are alltraits of the Archons and other versions of the same phenomenon.Extreme possession could certainty infuse the Ôspirit of darknessÕinto a partner during sex as the Nag Hammadi texts appear todescribe. Such an infusion can change genetics which is alsoenergetic information. Human genetics is information and the Ôspiritof darknessÕ is information. Mix one with the other and change musthappen. Islam has the concept of a ÔJinn babyÕ through possession ofthe mother and by Jinn taking human form. There are many waysthat human genetics can be changed and remember that Archonshave been aware all along of advanced techniques to do this. What isbeing done in human society today Ð and far more Ð was knownabout by Archons at the time of the Ôfallen onesÕ and their otherversions described in religions and cultures.
Archons and their human-world Cult are obsessed with geneticsas we see today and they know this dictates how information isprocessed into perceived reality during a human life. They needed toproduce a human form that would decode the simulation and this issymbolically known as ÔAdam and EveÕ who le the ÔgardenÕ (primereality) and ÔfellÕ into Matrix reality. The simulation is not aÔphysicalÕ construct (there is no ÔphysicalÕ); it is a source ofinformation. Think Wi-Fi again. The simulation is an energetic Þeldencoded with information and body-brain systems are designed todecode that information encoded in wave or frequency form whichis transmithe brain to construct our sense of reality Ð an illusory ÔphysicalÕworld that only exists in the brain or the mind. Virtual reality gamesmimic this process using the same sensory decoding system.Information is fed to the senses to decode a virtual reality that canappear so real, but isnÕt (Figs 18 and 19). Some scientists believe Ðand I agree with them Ð that what we perceive as ÔphysicalÕ realityonly exists when we are looking or observing. The act of perceptionor focus triggers the decoding systems which turn waveforminformation into holographic reality. When we are not observingsomething our reality reverts from a holographic state to a waveformstate. This relates to the same principle as a falling tree not making anoise unless someone is there to hear it or decode it. The conceptmakes sense from the simulation perspective. A computer is notdecoding all the information in a Wi-Fi Þeld all the time and onlydecodes or brings into reality on the screen that part of Wi-Fi that itÕsdecoding Ð focusing upon Ð at that moment.


Interestingly, Professor Donald Ho.man at the Department ofCognitive Sciences at the University of California, Irvine, says thatour experienced reality is like a computer interface that shows usonly the level with which we interact while hiding all that existsbeyond it: ÔEvolution shaped us with a user interface that hides thetruth. Nothing that we see is the truth Ð the very language of spaceand time and objects is the wrong language to describe reality.Õ He iscorrect in what he says on so many levels. Space and time are not auniversal reality. They are a phenomenon of decoded simulation reality as part of the process of enslaving our sense of reality. Near-death experiencers report again and again how space and time didnot exist as we perceive them once they were free of the body Ð bodydecoding systems. You can appreciate from this why Archons andtheir Cult are so desperate to entrap human aesenses where we are in the Matrix and of the Matrix. Opening yourmind to expanded states of awareness takes you beyond theinformation conÞnes of the simulation and you become aware ofknowledge and insights denied to you before. This is what we callÔawakeningÕ Ð awakening from the Matrix Ð and in the Þnal chapter Iwill relate this to current events.
Where are the ÔaliensÕ? 
A simulation would explain the so-called ÔFermi ParadoxÕ namedaer Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) who created the Þrstnuclear reactor. He considered the question of why there is such alack of extraterrestrial activity when there are so many stars andplanets in an apparently vast universe; but what if the night sky thatwe see, or think we do, is a simulated projection as I say? If youcontrol the simulation and your aim is to hold humanity fast inessential ignorance would you want other forms of life includingadvanced life coming and going sharing information withhumanity? Or would you want them to believe they were isolatedand apparently alone? Themes of human isolation and apartness arecommon whether they be the perception of a lifeless universe or thefascist isolation laws of the ÔCovidÕ era. Paradoxically the veryexistence of a simulation means that we are not alone when someforce had to construct it. My view is that experiences that peoplehave reported all over the world for centuries with Reptilians andGrey entities are Archon phenomena as Nag Hammadi textsdescribe; and that benevolent ÔalienÕ interactions are non-humangroups that come in and out of the simulation by overcomingArchon aReptilians and Greys are obsessed with genetics and technology asrelated by cultural accounts and those who say they have beenabducted by them. Technology is their way of overcoming some ofthe limitations in their creative potential and our technology-drivenand controlled human society of today is archetypical Archon.Reptilian-Grey modus operandi. Technocracy is really Archontocracy.The Universe does not have to be as big as it appears with asimulation. There is no space or distance only information decodedinto holographic reality. What we call ÔspaceÕ is only the absence ofholographic ÔobjectsÕ and that ÔspaceÕ is The Field of energeticinformation which connects everything into a single whole. Thesame applies with the artiÞcially-generated information Þeld of thesimulation. The Universe is not big or small as a physical reality. It isdecoded information, thatÕs all, and its perceived size is decided bythe way the simulation is encoded to make it appear. The entirenight sky as we perceive it only exists in our brain and so where arethose Ômillions of light yearsÕ? The ÔstarsÕ on the ceiling of thePlanetarium looked a vast distance away.
ThereÕs another point to mention about ÔaliensÕ. I have beenhighlighting since the 1990s the plan to stage a fake Ôalien invasionÕto justify the centralisation of global power and a world military.Nazi scientist Werner von Braun, who was taken to America byOperation Paperclip aer World War Two to help found NASA, toldhis American assistant Dr Carol Rosin about the Cult agenda whenhe knew he was dying in 1977. Rosin said that he told her about asequence that would lead to total human control by a one-worldgovernment. This included threats from terrorism, rogue nations,meteors and asteroids before Þnally an Ôalien invasionÕ. All of thesethings, von Braun said, would be bogus and what I would refer to asa No-Problem-Reaction-Solution. Keep this in mind when Ôthe aliensare comingÕ is the new mantra. The aliens are not coming Ð they arealready here and they have inÞltrated human society while lookinghuman. French-Canadian investigative journalist Serge Monast saidin 1994 that he had uncovered a NASA/military operation calledProject Blue Beam which Þts with what Werner von Braun predicted.Monast died of a Ôheart aas arrestedand spent a night in prison. He was 51. He said Blue Beam was aplan to stage an alien invasion that would include religious Þguresbeamed holographically into the sky as part of a global manipulationto usher in a Ônew ageÕ of worshipping what I would say is the CultÔgodÕ Yaldabaoth in a one-world religion. Fake holographic asteroidsare also said to be part of the plan which again syncs with vonBraun. How could you stage an illusory threat from asteroids unlessthey were holographic inserts? This is preard giventhe advanced technology outside the public arena and the fact thatour ÔphysicalÕ reality is holographic anyway. Information Þeldswould be projected and we would decode them into the illusion of aÔphysicalÕ asteroid. If they can sell a global ÔpandemicÕ with a ÔvirusÕthat doesnÕt exist what will humans not believe if government andmedia tell them?
All this is particularly relevant as I write with the Pentagonplanning to release in June, 2021, information about ÔUFO sightingsÕ.I have been following the UFO story since the early 1990s and thecommon theme throughout has been government and militarydenials and cover up. More recently, however, the Pentagon hassuddenly become more talkative and apparently open with AirForce pilot radar images released of unexplained cra moving andchanging direction at speeds well beyond anything believed possiblewith human technology. Then, in March, 2021, former Director ofNational Intelligence John Ratcli.e said a Pentagon report monthslater in June would reveal a great deal of information about UFOsightings unknown to the public. He said the report would haveÔmassive implicationsÕ. The order to do this was included bizarrelyin a $2.3 trillion ÔcoronavirusÕ relief and government funding billpassed by the Trump administration at the end of 2020. I would addsome serious notes of caution here. I have been pointing out sincethe 1990s that the US military and intelligence networks have longhad cra Ð Ôßying saucersÕ or anti-gravity cra Ð which any observerwould take to be extraterrestrial in origin. Keeping this knowledgefrom the public allows cra ßown by humans to be perceived as alienvisitations. I am not saying that ÔaliensÕ do not exist. I would be thelast one to say that, but we have to be streetwise here. PresidentRonald Reagan told the UN General Assembly in 1987: ÔIoccasionally think how quickly our di.erences worldwide wouldvanish if we were facing an alien threat from outside this world.ÕThatÕs the idea. Unite against a common ÔenemyÕ with a commonpurpose behind your Ôsaviour forceÕ (the Cult) as this age-oldtechnique of mass manipulation goes global.
Science moves this way É 
I could Þnd only one other person who was discussing thesimulation hypothesis publicly when I concluded it was real. Thiswas Nick Bostrom, a Swedish-born philosopher at the University ofOxford, who has explored for many years the possibility that humanreality is a computer simulation although his version and mine arenot the same. Today the simulation and holographic realityhypothesis have increasingly entered the scientiÞc mainstream. Well,the more open-minded mainstream, that is. Here are a few of theever-gathering examples. American nuclear physicist Silas Beane leda team of physicists at the University of Bonn in Germany pursuingthe question of whether we live in a simulation. They concluded thatwe probably do and it was likely based on a lafound that cosmic rays align with that speciÞc pahighlighted the GreisenÐZatsepinÐKuzmin (GZK) limit which refersto cosmic ray particle interaction with cosmic background radiationthat creates an apparent boundary for cosmic ray particles. They sayin a paper entitled ÔConstraints on the Universe as a NumericalSimulationÕ that this Ôpaouwould Þnd with a computer simulation. They also made the pointthat a simulation would create its own Ôlaws of physicsÕ that wouldlimit possibility. IÕve been making the same point for decades thatthe perceived laws of physics relate only to this reality, or what Iwould later call the simulation. When designers write codes to createcomputer and virtual reality games they are the equivalent of thelaws of physics for that game. Players interact within the limitationslaid out by the coding. In the same way those who wrote the codesfor the simulation decided the laws of physics that would apply.These can be overridden by expanded states of consciousness, butnot by those enslaved in only Þve-sense awareness where simulationcodes rule. Overriding the codes is what people call ÔmiraclesÕ. Theyare not. They are bypassing the encoded limits of the simulation. Apopulation caught in simulation perception would have no idea thatthis was their plight. As the Bonn paper said: ÔLike a prisoner in apitch-black cell we would not be able to see the ÒwallsÓ of ourprison,Õ ThatÕs true if people remain mesmerised by the Þve senses.Open to expanded awareness and those walls become very clear. Themain one is the speed of light.
American theoretical physicist James Gates is another who hasexplored the simulation question and found considerable evidenceto support the idea. Gates was Professor of Physics at the Universityof Maryland, Director of The Center for String and Particle Theory,and on Barack ObamaÕs Council of Advisors on Science andTechnology. He and his team found computer codes of digital dataembedded in the fabric of our reality. They relate to on-o. electricalcharges of 1 and 0 in the binary system used by computers. ÔWe haveno idea what they are doing thereÕ, Gates said. They found withinthe energetic fabric mathematical sequences known as error-correcting codes or block codes that ÔrebootÕ data to its original stateor Ôdefault seasasked if he had found a set of equations embedded in our realityindistinguishable from those that drive search engines and browsersand he said: ÔThat is correct.Õ Rich Terrile, director of the Centre forEvolutionary Computation and Automated Design at NASAÕs JetPropulsion Laboratory, has said publicly that he believes theUniverse is a digital hologram that must have been created by a formof intelligence. I agree with that in every way. Waveform informationis delivered electrically by the senses to the brain which constructs adigital holographic reality that we call the ÔworldÕ. This digital levelof reality can be read by the esoteric art of numerology. Digitalholograms are at the cu. We havedigital technology everywhere designed to access and manipulateour digital level of perceived reality. Synthetic mRNA in ÔCovidvaccinesÕ has a digital component to manipulate the bodyÕs digitalÔoperating systemÕ.
Reality is numbers 
How many know that our reality can be broken down to numbersand codes that are the same as computer games? Max Tegmark, aphysicist at the Massachuseechnology (MIT), is theauthor of Our Mathematical Universe in which he lays out how realitycan be entirely described by numbers and maths in the way that avideo game is encoded with the ÔphysicsÕ of computer games. Ourworld and computer virtual reality are essentially the same.Tegmark imagines the perceptions of characters in an advancedcomputer game when the graphics are so good they donÕt know theyare in a game. They think they can bump into real objects(electromagnetic resistance in our reality), fall in love and feelemotions like excitement. When they began to study the apparentlyÔphysical worldÕ of the video game they would realise thateverything was made of pixels (which have been found in ourenergetic reality as must be the case when on one level our world isdigital). What computer game characters thought was physicalÔstu.Õ, Tegmark said, could actually be broken down into numbers:
And weÕre exactly in this situation in our world. We look around and it doesnÕt seem that mathematical at all, but everything we see is made out of elementary particles like quarks and electrons. And what properties does an electron have? Does it have a smell or a colour or a texture? No! ... We physicists have come up with geeky names for [Electron] properties, like electric charge, or spin, or lepton number, but the electron doesnÕt care what we call it, the properties are just numbers. 
This is the illusory reality Gnostics were describing. This is thesimulation. The A, C, G, and T codes of DNA have a binary value ÐA and C = 0 while G and T = 1. This has to be when the simulation isdigital and the body must be digital to interact with it. Recurringmathematical sequences are encoded throughout reality and thebody. They include the Fibonacci sequence in which the twoprevious numbers are added to get the next one, as in ... 1, 1, 2, 3, 5,8, 13, 21, 34, 55, etc. The sequence is encoded in the human face andbody, proportions of animals, DNA, seed heads, pine cones, trees,shells, spiral galaxies, hurricanes and the number of petals in aßower. The list goes on and on. There are fractal paer.ending pascales in the as above, so below, principle of holograms. These andother famous recurring geometrical and mathematical sequencessuch as Phi, Pi, Golden Mean, Golden Ratio and Golden Section arecomputer codes of the simulation. I had to laugh and give my head ashake the day I Þnished this book and it went into the productionstage. I was sent an article in Scientific American published in April,2021, with the headline ÔConÞrmed! We Live in a SimulationÕ. Twodecades aer I Þrst said our reality is a simulation and the speed oflight is itÕs outer limit the article suggested that we do live in asimulation and that the speed of light is its outer limit. I le school at15 and never passed a major exam in my life while the writer was upto his eyes in qualiÞcations. As I will explain in the Þnal chapterknowing is far beery di.erentsources. The article rightly connected the speed of light to theprocessing speed of the ÔMatrixÕ and said what has been in my booksall this time É ÔIf we are in a simulation, as it appears, then space isan abstract property wris not and ifwe live in a simulation something created it and it wasnÕt us. ÔThatDavid Icke says we are manipulated by aliensÕ Ð heÕs crackers.Õ
Wow É 
The reality that humanity thinks is so real is an illusion. Politicians,governments, scientists, doctors, academics, law enforcement,media, school and university curriculums, on and on, are allfounded on a world that does not exist except as a simulated prisoncell. Is it such a stretch to accept that ÔCovidÕ doesnÕt exist when ourentire ÔphysicalÕ reality doesnÕt exist? Revealed here is theknowledge kept under raps in the Cult networks ofcompartmentalised secrecy to control humanityÕs sense of reality byinducing the population to believe in a reality thatÕs not real. If itwasnÕt so tragic in its experiential consequences the whole thingwould be hysterically funny. None of this is new to Renegade Minds.Ancient Greek philosopher Plato (about 428 to about 347BC) was amajor inßuence on Gnostic belief and he described the human plightthousands of years ago with his Allegory of the Cave. He told thesymbolic story of prisoners living in a cave who had never beenoutside. They were chained and could only see one wall of the cavewhile behind them was a Þre that they could not see. Figures walkedpast the Þre casting shadows on the prisonersÕ wall and thosemoving shadows became their sense of reality. Some prisoners beganto study the shadows and were considered experts on them (todayÕsacademics and scientists), but what they studied was only an illusion(todayÕs academics and scientists). A prisoner escaped from the caveand saw reality as it really is. When he returned to report thisrevelation they didnÕt believe him, called him mad and threatened tokill him if he tried to set them free. PlatoÕs tale is not only a brilliantanalogy of the human plight and our illusory reality. It describes,too, the dynamics of the ÔCovidÕ hoax. I have only skimmed thesurface of these subjects here. The aim of this book is to crisplyconnect all essential dots to put what is happening today into its truecontext. All subject areas and their connections in this chapter arecovered in great evidential detail in Everything You Need To Know, But Have Never Been Told and The Answer.
They say that bewildered people ÔcanÕt see the forest for the treesÕ.Humanity, however, canÕt see the forest for the twigs. The Þve senses
see only twigs while Renegade Minds can see the forest and itÕs theforest where the answers lie with the connections that reveals.Breaking free of perceptual programming so the forest can be seen isthe way we turn all this around. Not breaking free is how humanitygot into this mess. The situation may seem hopeless, but I promiseyou itÕs not. We are a perceptual heartbeat from paradise if only weknew.
CHAPTER TWELVE 
Escaping Wetiko 
Life is simply a vacation from the infinite 
Dean Cavanagh 
Renegade Minds weave the web of life and events and seecommon themes in the apparently random. They are alwaysthere if you look for them and their pursuit is aided by incrediblesynchronicity that comes when your mind is open rather thanmesmerised by what it thinks it can see.
InÞnite awareness is inÞnite possibility and the more of inÞnitepossibility that we access the more becomes inÞnitely possible. Thatmay be stating the apparently obvious, but it is a devastatingly-powerful fact that can set us free. We are a point of aan inÞnity of consciousness. The question is how much of thatinÞnity do we choose to access? How much knowledge, insight,awareness, wisdom, do we want to connect with and explore? Ifyour focus is only in the Þve senses you will be inßuenced by afraction of inÞnite awareness. I mean a range so tiny that it givesnew meaning to inÞnitesimal. Limitation of self-identity and a senseof the possible limit accordingly your range of consciousness. We arewhat we think we are. Life is what we think it is. The dream is thedreamer and the dreamer is the dream. Buddhist philosophy puts itthis way: ÔAs a thing is viewed, so it appears.Õ Most humans live inthe realm of touch, taste, see, hear, and smell and thatÕs the limit oftheir sense of the possible and sense of self. Many will follow areligion and speak of a God in his heaven, but their lives are stilldominated by the Þve senses in their perceptions and actions. TheÞve senses become the arbiter of everything. When that happens allexcept a smear of inÞnity is sealed away from inßuence by the rigid,unyielding, reality bubbles that are the Þve-sense human orPhantom Self. Archon Cult methodology is to isolate consciousnesswithin Þve-sense reality Ð the simulation Ð and then program thatconsciousness with a sense of self and the world through a deluge oflife-long information designed to instil the desired perception thatallows global control. E.orts to do this have increased dramaticallywith identity politics as identity bubbles are squeezed into theminutiae of Þve-sense detail which disconnect people even moreprofoundly from the inÞnite ÔIÕ.
Five-sense focus and self-identity are like a Þrewall that limitsaccess to the inÞnite realms. You only perceive one radio ortelevision station and no other. WeÕll take that literally for a moment.Imagine a vast array of stations giving di.erent information andangles on reality, but you only ever listen to one. Here we have thehuman plight in which the population is overwhelmingly conÞnedto CultFM. This relates only to the frequency range of CultFM andlimits perception and insight to that band Ð limits possibility to thatband. It means you are connecting with an almost imperceptiblyminuscule range of possibility and creative potential within theinÞnite Field. ItÕs a world where everything seems apart fromeverything else and where synchronicity is rare. Synchronicity isdeÞned in the dictionary as Ôthe happening by chance of two or morerelated or similar events at the same timeÔ. Use of Ôby chanceÕ betraysa complete misunderstanding of reality. Synchronicity is not ÔbychanceÕ. As people open their minds, or ÔawakenÕ to use the term,they notice more and more coincidences in their lives, bits of ÔluckÕ,apparently miraculous happenings that put them in the right placeat the right time with the right people. Days become peppered withÔfancy meeting you hereÕ and Ôwhat are the chances of that?Õ Myentire life has been lived like this and ever more so since my owncolossal awakening in 1990 and 91 which transformed my sense ofreality. Synchronicity is not Ôby chanceÕ; it is by accessing expandedrealms of possibility which allow expanded potential formanifestation. People broadcasting the same vibe from the sameopenness of mind tend to be drawn Ôby chanceÕ to each otherthrough what I call frequency magnetism and itÕs not only people. Inthe last more than 30 years incredible synchronicity has also led methrough the Cult maze to information in so many forms and tocrucial personal experiences. These ÔcoincidencesÕ have allowed meto put the puzzle pieces together across an enormous array ofsubjects and situations. Those who have breached the bubble of Þve-sense reality will know exactly what I mean and this escape from theperceptual prison cell is open to everyone whenever they make thatchoice. This may appear super-human when compared with thelimitations of ÔhumanÕ, but itÕs really our natural state. ÔHumanÕ ascurrently experienced is consciousness in an unnatural state ofinduced separation from the inÞnity of the whole. IÕll come to howthis transformation into unity can be made when I have described inmore detail the force that holds humanity in servitude by denyingthis access to inÞnite self.
The Wetiko factor 
I have been talking and writing for decades about the way Þve-sensemind is systematically barricaded from expanded awareness. I haveused the analogy of a computer (Þve-sense mind) and someone atthe keyboard (expanded awareness). Interaction between thecomputer and the operator is symbolic of the interaction betweenÞve-sense mind and expanded awareness. The computer directlyexperiences the Internet and the operator experiences the Internetvia the computer which is how itÕs supposed to be Ð the two workingas one. Archons seek to control that point where the operatorconnects with the computer to stop that interaction (Fig 20). Now theoperator is banging the keyboard and clicking the mouse, but thecomputer is not responding and this happens when the computer istaken over Ð possessed Ð by an appropriately-named computer ÔvirusÕ.The operator has lost all inßuence over the computer which goes itsown way making decisions under the control of the ÔvirusÕ. I havejust described the dynamic through which the force known toGnostics as Yaldabaoth and Archons disconnects Þve-sense mindfrom expanded awareness to imprison humanity in perceptualservitude.

About a year ago I came across a Native American concept ofWetiko which describes precisely the same phenomenon. Wetiko isthe spelling used by the Cree and there are other versions includingwintiko and windigo used by other tribal groups. They spell thename with lower case, but I see Wetiko as a proper noun as withArchons and prefer a capital. I Þrst saw an article about Wetiko bywriter and researcher Paul Levy which so synced with what I hadbeen writing about the computer/operator disconnection and laterthe Archons. I then read his book, the fascinating Dispelling Wetiko, Breaking the Spell of Evil. The parallels between what I had concludedlong before and the Native American concept of Wetiko were soclear and obvious that it was almost funny. For Wetiko see theGnostic Archons for sure and the Jinn, the Predators, and everyother name for a force of evil, inversion and chaos. Wetiko is theNative American name for the force that divides the computer fromthe operator (Fig 21). Indigenous author Jack D. Forbes, a founder ofthe Native American movement in the 1960s, wrote another bookabout Wetiko entitled Columbus And Other Cannibals Ð The Wetiko Disease of Exploitation, Imperialism, and Terrorism which I also read.Forbes says that Wetiko refers to an evil person or spirit Ôwhoterrorizes other creatures by means of terrible acts, includingcannibalismÕ. Zulu shaman Credo Mutwa told me that Africanaccounts tell how cannibalism was brought into the world by theChitauri ÔgodsÕ Ð another manifestation of Wetiko. The distinctionbetween Ôevil person or spiritÕ relates to Archons/Wetiko possessinga human or acting as pure consciousness. Wetiko is said to be asickness of the soul or spirit and a state of being that takes but givesnothing back Ð the Cult and its operatives perfectly described. BlackHawk, a Native American war leader defending their lands fromconÞscation, said European invaders had Ôpoisoned heartsÕ Ð Wetikohearts Ð and that this would spread to native societies. Mention ofthe heart is very signiÞcant as we shall shortly see. Forbes writes:ÔTragically, the history of the world for the past 2,000 years is, ingreat part, the story of the epidemiology of the wetiko disease.Õ Yes,and much longer. Forbes is correct when he says: ÔThe wetikosdestroyed Egypt and Babylon and Athens and Rome andTenochtitlan [capital of the Aztec empire] and perhaps now they willdestroy the entire earth.Õ Evil, he said, is the number one export of aWetiko culture Ð see its globalisation with ÔCovidÕ. Constant war,mass murder, su.ering of all kinds, child abuse, Satanism, tortureand human sacriÞce are all expressions of Wetiko and the Wetikopossessed. The world is Wetiko made manifest, but it doesnÕt have to be. There is a way out of this even now.

Cult of Wetiko 
Wetiko is the Yaldabaoth frequency distortion that seeks to ahuman consciousness and absorb it into its own. Once thisconnection is made Wetiko can drive the perceptions of the targetwhich they believe to be coming from their own mind. All thehorrors of history and today from mass killers to Satanists,paedophiles like Je.rey Epstein and other psychopaths, are theembodiment of Wetiko and express its state of being in all itsgrotesqueness. The Cult is Wetiko incarnate, Yaldabaoth incarnate,and it seeks to facilitate Wetiko assimilation of humanity in totalityinto its distortion by manipulating the population into lowfrequency states that match its own. Paul Levy writes:ÔHolographically enforced within the psyche of every human beingthe wetiko virus pervades and underlies the entire Þeld ofconsciousness, and can therefore potentially manifest through anyone of us at any moment if we are not mindful.Õ The ÔCovidÕ hoaxhas achieved this with many people, but others have not fallen intoWetikoÕs frequency lair. Players in the ÔCovidÕ human catastropheincluding Gates, Schwab, Tedros, Fauci, Whi, Vallance, Johnson,Hancock, Ferguson, Drosten, and all the rest, including thepsychopath psychologists, are expressions of Wetiko. This is whythey have no compassion or empathy and no emotional consequencefor what they do that would make them stop doing it. Observe allthe people who support the psychopaths in authority against thePushbackers despite the damaging impact the psychopaths have ontheir own lives and their familyÕs lives. You are again looking atWetiko possession which prevents them seeing through the lies tothe obvious scam going on. Why canÕt they see it? Wetiko wonÕt letthem see it. The perceptual divide that has now become a chasm isbetween the Wetikoed and the non-Wetikoed.
Paul Levy describes Wetiko in the same way that I have longdescribed the Archontic force. They are the same distortedconsciousness operating across dimensions of reality: ÔÉ the subtlebody of wetiko is not located in the third dimension of space andtime, literally existing in another dimension É it is able to a.ectordinary lives by mysteriously interpenetrating into our three-dimensional world.Õ Wetiko does this through its incarnaterepresentatives in the Cult and by weaving itself into The Fieldwhich on our level of reality is the electromagnetic information Þeldof the simulation or Matrix. More than that, the simulation is Wetiko/ Yaldabaoth. Caleb Scharf, Director of Astrobiology at ColumbiaUniversity, has speculated that Ôalien lifeÕ could be so advanced thatit has transcribed itself into the quantum realm to become what wecall physics. He said intelligence indistinguishable from the fabric ofthe Universe would solve many of its greatest mysteries:
Perhaps hyper-advanced life isnÕt just external. Perhaps itÕs already all around. It is embedded in what we perceive to be physics itself, from the root behaviour of particles and fields to the phenomena of complexity and emergence ... In other words, life might not just be in the equations. It might BE the equations [My emphasis]. 
Scharf said it is possible that Ôwe donÕt recognise advanced lifebecause it forms an integral and unsuspicious part of what weÕveconsidered to be the natural worldÕ. I agree. Wetiko/Yaldabaoth is thesimulation. We are literally in the body of the beast. But that doesnÕtmean it has to control us. We all have the power to overcome Wetikoinßuence and the Cult knows that. I doubt it sleeps too well becauseit knows that.
Which Field? 
This, I suggest, is how it all works. There are two Fields. One is theÞerce electromagnetic light of the Matrix within the speed of light;the other is the Ôwatery lightÕ of The Field beyond the walls of theMatrix that connects with the Great InÞnity. Five-sense mind and thedecoding systems of the body aThey have to or we could not experience this reality. Five-sense mindsees only the Matrix Field of information while our expandedconsciousness is part of the InÞnity Field. When we open our minds,and most importantly our hearts, to the InÞnity Field we have amission control which gives us an expanded perspective, a roadmap, to understand the nature of the Þve-sense world. If we areisolated only in Þve-sense mind there is no mission control. WeÕre onour own trying to understand a world thatÕs constantly feeding usinformation to ensure we do not understand. People in this state canfeel ÔlostÕ and bewildered with no direction or radar. You can seeever more clearly those who are inßuenced by the Fields of BigInÞnity or lie-sense mind simply by their views and behaviourwith regard to the ÔCovidÕ hoax. We have had this divisionthroughout known human history with the mass of the people onone side and individuals who could see and intuit beyond the wallsof the simulation Ð PlatoÕs prisoner who broke out of the cave andsaw reality for what it is. Such people have always been targeted byWetiko/Archon-possessed authority, burned at the stake ordemonised as mad, bad and dangerous. The Cult today and itsglobal network of Ôanti-hateÕ, Ôanti-fascistÕ Woke groups are allexpressions of Wetiko a,ÔCovidÕ lies and the ÔvaccineÕ agenda.
Woke as a whole is Wetiko which explains its black and whitementality and how at one it is with the Wetiko-possessed Cult. PaulLevy said: ÔTo be in this paradigm is to still be under the thrall of atwo-valued logic Ð where things are either true or false Ð of awetikoized mind.Õ Wetiko consciousness is in a permanent rage,therefore so is Woke, and then there is Woke inversion andcontradiction. ÔAnti-fascistsÕ act like fascists because fascists and Ôanti.fascistsÕ are both Wetiko at work. Political parties act the same whileclaiming to be di.erent for the same reason. Secret society andsatanic rituals are aetiko and the cold, ruthless,psychopathic mentality that secures the positions of power all overthe world is Wetiko. Reframing Ôtraining programmesÕ have thesame cumulative e.ect of aetiko and we have theirgraduates described as automatons and robots with a cold,psychopathic, uncaring demeanour. They are all traits of Wetikopossession and look how many times they have been described inthis book and elsewhere with regard to personnel behind ÔCovidÕincluding the police and medical profession. Climbing the greasypole in any profession in a Wetiko society requires traits of Wetiko toget there and that is particularly true of politics which is not aboutfair competition and pre-eminence of ideas. It is founded on howmany backs you can stab and arses you can lick. This culminated inthe global ÔCovidÕ coordination between the Wetiko possessed whopulled it o. in all the di.erent countries without a trace of empathyand compassion for their impact on humans. Our sight sense can seeonly holographic form and not the Field which connects holographicform. Therefore we perceive ÔphysicalÕ objects with ÔspaceÕ inbetween. In fact that ÔspaceÕ is energy/consciousness operating onmultiple frequencies. One of them is Wetiko and that connects theCult psychopaths, those who submit to the psychopaths, and thosewho serve the psychopaths in the media operations of the world.Wetiko is Gates. Wetiko is the mask-wearing submissive. Wetiko isthe fake journalist and Ôfact-checkerÕ. The Wetiko Field iscoordinating the whole thing. Psychopaths, gofers, mediaoperatives, Ôanti-hateÕ hate groups, Ôfact-checkersÕ and submissivepeople work as one unit even without human coordination because theyare asame Field which is organising it all (Fig 22). PaulLevy is here describing how Wetiko-possessed people are drawntogether and refuse to let any information breach their rigid
perceptions. He was writing long before ÔCovidÕ, but I think you willrecognise followers of the ÔCovidÕ religion oh just a little bit:
People who are channelling the vibratory frequency of wetiko align with each other through psychic resonance to reinforce their unspoken shared agreement so as to uphold their deranged view of reality. Once an unconscious content takes possession of certain individuals, it irresistibly draws them together by mutual attraction and knits them into groups tied together by their shared madness that can easily swell into an avalanche of insanity. 
A psychic epidemic is a closed system, which is to say that it is insular and not open to any new information or informing influences from the outside world which contradict its fixed, limited, and limiting perspective. 
There we have the Woke mind and the ÔCovidÕ mind. Compatibleresonance draws the awakening together, too, which is clearlyhappening today.

Spiritual servitude 
Wetiko doesnÕt care about humans. ItÕs not human; it just possesseshumans for its own ends and the e.ect (depending on the scale ofpossession) can be anything from extreme psychopathy tounquestioning obedience. WetikoÕs worst nightmare is for humanconsciousness to expand beyond the simulation. Everything isfocussed on stopping that happening through control ofinformation, thus perception, thus frequency. The ÔeducationsystemÕ, media, science, medicine, academia, are all geared tomaintaining humanity in Þve-sense servitude as is the constantstimulation of low-vibrational mental and emotional states (seeÔCovidÕ). Wetiko seeks to dominate those subconscious spacesbetween Þve-sense perception and expanded consciousness wherethe computer meets the operator. From these subconscious hidingplaces Wetiko speaks to us to trigger urges and desires that we taketo be our own and manipulate us into anything from low-vibrationalto psychopathic states. Remember how Islam describes the Jinn asinvisible tricksters that ÔwhisperÕ and confuse. Wetiko is the origin ofthe Ôtrickster godÕ theme that you Þnd in cultures all over the world.Jinn, like the Archons, are Wetiko which is terriÞed of humansawakening and reconnecting with our true self for then its energysource has gone. With that the feedback loop breaks between Wetikoand human perception that provides the energetic momentum onwhich its very existence depends as a force of evil. Humans are bothits target and its source of survival, but only if we are operating inlow-vibrational states of fear, hate, depression and the backgroundanxiety that most people su.er. We are WetikoÕs target because weare its key to survival. It needs us, not the other way round. PaulLevy writes:
A vampire has no intrinsic, independent, substantial existence in its own right; it only exists in relation to us. The pathogenic, vampiric mind-parasite called wetiko is nothing in itself Ð not being able to exist from its own side Ð yet it has a Ôvirtual realityÕ such that it can potentially destroy our species É 
ÉThe fact that a vampire is not reflected by a mirror can also mean that what we need to see is that thereÕs nothing, no-thing to see, other than ourselves. The fact that wetiko is the expression of something inside of us means that the cure for wetiko is with us as well. The critical issue is finding this cure within us and then putting it into effect. 
Evil begets evil because if evil does not constantly expand andÞnd new sources of energetic sustenance its evil, its distortion, dieswith the assimilation into balance and harmony. Love is the garlic toWetikoÕs vampire. Evil, the absence of love, cannot exist in thepresence of love. I think I see a way out of here. I have emphasisedso many times over the decades that the Archons/Wetiko and theirCult are not all powerful. They are not. I donÕt care how it looks evennow they are not. I have not called them lifor e.ect. I have said it because it is true. WetikoÕs insatiable desirefor power over others is not a sign of its omnipotence, but itsinsecurity. Paul Levy writes: ÔDue to the primal fear whichultimately drives it and which it is driven to cultivate, wetikoÕs bodypolitic has an intrinsic and insistent need for centralising power andcontrol so as to create imagined safety for itself.Õ Yeeeeeees! Exactly!Why does Wetiko want humans in an ongoing state of fear? Wetikoitself is fear and it is petriÞed of love. As evil is an absence of love, solove is an absence of fear. Love conquers all and especially Wetikowhich is fear. Wetiko brought fear into the world when it wasnÕt herebefore. Fear was the ÔfallÕ, the fall into low-frequency ignorance andillusion Ð fear is False Emotion Appearing Real. The simulation isdriven and energised by fear because Wetiko/Yaldabaoth (fear) are the simulation. Fear is the absence of love and Wetiko is the absenceof love.
Wetiko today 
We can now view current events from this level of perspective. TheÔCovidÕ hoax has generated momentous amounts of ongoing fear,anxiety, depression and despair which have empowered Wetiko. Nowonder people like Gates have been the instigators when they areWetiko incarnate and exhibit every trait of Wetiko in the extreme.See how cold and unemotional these people are like Gates and hiscronies, how dead of eye they are. ThatÕs Wetiko. Sabbatians areWetiko and everything they control including the World HealthOrganization, Big Pharma and the ÔvaccineÕ makers, national ÔhealthÕhierarchies, corporate media, Silicon Valley, the banking system, andthe United Nations with its planned transformation into worldgovernment. All are controlled and possessed by the Wetikodistortion into distorting human society in its image. We are withthis knowledge at the gateway to understanding the world.Divisions of race, culture, creed and sexuality are diversions to hidethe real division between those possessed and inßuenced by Wetikoand those that are not. The ÔCovidÕ hoax has brought both clearlyinto view. Human behaviour is not about race. Tyrants anddictatorships come in all colours and creeds. What unites the USpresident bombing the innocent and an African tribe commigenocide against another as in Rwanda? What unites them? Wetiko.All wars are Wetiko, all genocide is Wetiko, all hunger over centuriesin a world of plenty is Wetiko. Children going to bed hungry,including in the West, is Wetiko. Cult-generated Woke racialdivisions that focus on the body are designed to obscure the realitythat divisions in behaviour are manifestations of mind, not body.Obsession with body identity and group judgement is a means todivert aperception. Conßict sown by the Woke both within themselves andwith their target groups are Wetiko providing lunch for itselfthrough still more agents of the division, chaos, and fear on which itfeeds. The Cult is seeking to assimilate the entirety of humanity andall children and young people into the Wetiko frequency bymanipulating them into states of fear and despair. Witness all thesuicide and psychological unravelling since the spring of 2020.Wetiko psychopaths want to impose a state of unquestioningobedience to authority which is no more than a conduit for Wetiko toenforce its will and assimilate humanity into itself. It needs us tobelieve that resistance is futile when it fears resistance and evenmore so the game-changing non-cooperation with its impositions. Itcan use violent resistance for its beneÞt. Violent impositions andviolent resistance are both Wetiko. The Power of Love with its Powerof No will sweep Wetiko from our world. Wetiko and its Cult knowthat. They just donÕt want us to know.
AI Wetiko 
This brings me to AI or artiÞcial intelligence and something elseWetikos donÕt want us to know. What is AI really? I know aboutcomputer code algorithms and AI that learns from data input. These,however, are more diversions, the expeditionary force, for the real AIthat they want to connect to the human brain as promoted by SiliconValley Wetikos like Kurzweil. What is this AI? It is the frequency ofWetiko, the frequency of the Archons. The connection of AI to thehuman brain is the connection of the Wetiko frequency to create aWetiko hive mind and complete the job of assimilation. The hivemind is planned to be controlled from Israel and China which areboth 100 percent owned by Wetiko Sabbatians. The assimilationprocess has been going on minute by minute in the ÔsmartÕ era whichfused with the ÔCovidÕ era. We are told that social media isscrambling the minds of the young and changing their personality.This is true, but what is social media? Look more deeply at how itworks, how it creates divisions and conßict, the hostility and cruelty,the targeting of people until they are destroyed. ThatÕs Wetiko. Socialmedia is manipulated to tune people to the Wetiko frequency withall the emotional exploitation tricks employed by platforms likeFacebook and its Wetiko front man, Zuckerberg. FacebookÕsInstagram announced a new platform for children to overcome alegal bar on them using the main site. This is more Wetikoexploitation and manipulation of kids. Amnesty Internationallikened the plan to foxes o.ering to guard the henhouse and said itwas incompatible with human rights. Since when did Wetiko orZuckerberg (I repeat myself) care about that? Would Brin and Pageat Google, Wojcicki at YouTube, Bezos at Amazon and whoever thehell runs Twiere not channelling Wetiko?Would those who are developing technologies for no other reasonthan human control? How about those designing and sellingtechnologies to kill people and Big Pharma drug and ÔvaccineÕproducers who know they will end or devastate lives? Quite athought for these people to consider is that if you are Wetiko in ahuman life you are Wetiko on the Ôother sideÕ unless your frequencychanges and that can only change by a change of perception whichbecomes a change of behaviour. Where Gates is going does not bearthinking about although perhaps thatÕs exactly where he wants to go.Either way, thatÕs where heÕs going. His frequency will make it so.
The frequency lair 
I have been saying for a long time that a big part of the addiction tosmartphones and devices is that a frequency is coming o. them thatentraps the mind. People spend ages on their phones and sometimeseven a minute or so aer they put them down they pick them upagain and it all repeats. ÔCovidÕ lockdowns will have increased thisaddiction a million times for obvious reasons. Addictions to alcoholoverindulgence and drugs are another way that Wetiko entrapsconsciousness to avibrational psychological distress which alcoholism and drugaddiction further compound. Do we think itÕs really a coincidencethat access to them is made so easy while potions that can takepeople into realms beyond the simulation are banned and illegal? Ihave explored smartphone addiction in other books, the scale ismind-blowing, and that level of addiction does not come withouthelp. Tech companies that make these phones are Wetiko and theywill have no qualms about destroying the minds of children. We areseeing again with these companies the Wetiko perceptualcombination of psychopathic enforcers and weak and meekunquestioning compliance by the rank and Þle.
The global Smart Grid is the Wetiko Grid and it is crucial tocomplete the Cult endgame. The simulation is radiation and we arebeing deluged with technological radiation on a devastating scale.Wetiko frauds like Elon Musk serve Cult interests while occasionallycriticising them to maintain his street-cred. 5G and other forms ofWi-Fi are being directed at the earth from space on a volume andscale that goes on increasing by the day. Elon MuskÕs (o.cially)SpaceX Starlink project is in the process of puof satellites in low orbit to cover every inch of the planet with 5Gand other Wi-Fi to create KurzweilÕs global ÔcloudÕ to which thehuman mind is planned to be aery soon. SpaceX hasapproval to operate 12,000 satellites with more than 1,300 launchedat the time of writing and applications Þled for 30,000 more. Otheroperators in the Wi-Fi, 5G, low-orbit satellite market includeOneWeb (UK), Telesat (Canada), and AST & Science (US). Musk tellsus that AI could be the end of humanity and then launches acompany called Neuralink to connect the human brain to computers.MuskÕs (in theory) Tesla company is building electric cars and thedriverless vehicles of the smart control grid. As frauds andbullshi
5G and technological radiation in general are destructive tohuman health, genetics and psychology and increasing the strengthof artiÞcial radiation underpins the Þve-sense perceptual bubbleswhich are themselves expressions of radiation or electromagnetism.Freedom activist John Whitehead was so right with his Ôdatabit bydatabit, we are building our own electronic concentration campsÕ.The Smart Grid and 5G is a means to control the human mind andinfuse perceptual information into The Field to inßuence anyone insync with its frequency. You can change perception and behaviouren masse if you can manipulate the population into those levels offrequency and this is happening all around us today. The arroganceof Musk and his fellow Cult operatives knows no bounds in the waythat we see with Gates. MuskÕs satellites are so many in numberalready they are changing the night sky when viewed from Earth.The astronomy community has complained about this and they haveseen nothing yet. Some consequences of MuskÕs Wetiko hubrisinclude: Radiation; visible pollution of the night sky; interferencewith astronomy and meteorology; ground and water pollution fromintensive use of increasingly many spaceports; accumulating spacedebris; continual deorbiting and burning up of aging satellites,polluting the atmosphere with toxic dust and smoke; and ever-increasing likelihood of collisions. A collective public open lecomplaint to Musk said:
We are writing to you É because SpaceX is in process of surrounding the Earth with a network of thousands of satellites whose very purpose is to irradiate every square inch of the 
Earth. SpaceX, like everyone else, is treating the radiation as if it were not there. As if the mitochondria in our cells do not depend on electrons moving undisturbed from the food we digest to the oxygen we breathe. 
As if our nervous systems and our hearts are not subject to radio frequency interference like any piece of electronic equipment. As if the cancer, diabetes, and heart disease that now afflict a majority of the EarthÕs population are not metabolic diseases that result from interference with our cellular machinery. As if insects everywhere, and the birds and animals that eat them, are not starving to death as a result. 
People like Musk and Gates believe in their limitless Wetikoarrogance that they can do whatever they like to the world becausethey own it. Consequences for humanity are irrelevant. ItÕsabsolutely time that we stopped taking this shit from these self-styled masters of the Earth when you consider where this is going.
Why is the Cult so anti-human? 
I hear this question oen: Why would they do this when it will a.ectthem, too? Ah, but will it? Who is this them? Forget their bodies.They are just vehicles for Wetiko consciousness. When you break itall down to the foundations we are looking at a state of severelydistorted consciousness targeting another state of consciousness forassimilation. The rest is detail. The simulation is the ßy-trap inwhich unique sensations of the Þve senses create a cycle of addictioncalled reincarnation. Renegade Minds see that everything whichhappens in our reality is a smaller version of the whole picture inline with the holographic principle. Addiction to the radiation ofsmart technology is a smaller version of addiction to the wholesimulation. Connecting the body/brain to AI is taking that addictionon a giant step further to total ongoing control by assimilatinghuman incarnate consciousness into Wetiko. I have watched duringthe ÔCovidÕ hoax how many are becoming ever more profoundlyaetikoÕs perceptual calling cards of aggressive responseto any other point of view (ÔThere is no other god but meÕ),psychopathic lack of compassion and empathy, and servilesubmission to the narrative and will of authority. Wetiko is thepsychopaths and subservience to psychopaths. The Cult of Wetiko isso anti-human because it is not human. It embarked on a mission todestroy human by targeting everything that it means to be humanand to survive as human. ÔCovidÕ is not the end, just a means to anend. The Cult with its Wetiko consciousness is seeking to changeEarth systems, including the atmosphere, to suit them, not humans.The gathering bombardment of 5G alone from ground and space isdramatically changing The Field with which the Þve senses interact.There is so much more to come if we sit on our hands and hope itwill all go away. It is not meant to go away. It is meant to get evermore extreme and we need to face that while we still can Ð just.
Carbon dioxide is the gas of life. Without that human is over.Kaput, gone, history. No natural world, no human. The Cult hascreated a cock and bull story about carbon dioxide and climatechange to justify its reduction to the point where Gates and theignoramus Biden Ôclimate chiefÕ John Kerry want to suck it out of theatmosphere. Kerry wants to do this because his master Gates does.Wetikos have made the gas of life a demon with the usual supportfrom the Wokers of Extinction Rebellion and similar organisationsand the bewildered puppet-child that is Greta Thunberg who wasput on the world stage by Klaus Schwab and the World EconomicForum. The name Extinction Rebellion is both ironic and as alwaysWetiko inversion. The gas that we need to survive must be reducedto save us from extinction. The most basic need of human is oxygenand we now have billions walking around in face nappies deprivingbody and brain of this essential requirement of human existence.More than that 5G at 60 gigahertz interacts with the oxygenmolecule to reduce the amount of oxygen the body can absorb intothe bloodstream. The obvious knock-on consequences of that forrespiratory and cognitive problems and life itself need no furtherexplanation. Psychopaths like Musk are assembling a global systemof satellites to deluge the human atmosphere with this insanity. Theman should be in jail. Here we have two most basic of human needs,oxygen and carbon dioxide, being dismantled.
Two others, water and food, are geUnited Nations Agendas 21 and 2030 Ð the Great Reset Ð planning tocentrally control all water and food supplies. People will not evenown rain water that falls on their land. Food is a.ected at the mostbasic level by reducing carbon dioxide. We have genetic modiÞcationor GMO inÞltrating the food chain on a mass scale, pesticides andherbicides polluting the air and destroying the soil. Freshwater Þshthat provide livelihoods for 60 million people and feed hundreds ofmillions worldwide are being Ôpushed to the brinkÕ according theconservationists while climate change is the only focus. Now wehave Gates and Schwab wanting to dispense with current foodsources all together and replace them with a synthetic version whichthe Wetiko Cult would control in terms of production and who eatsand who doesnÕt. We have been on the Totalitarian Tiptoe to this formore than 60 years as food has become ever more processed and fullof chemical shite to the point today when itÕs not natural food at all.As Dr Tom Cowan says: ÔIf it has a label donÕt eat it.Õ Bill Gates isnow the biggest owner of farmland in the United States and he doesnothing without an ulterior motive involving the Cult. Klaus Schwabwrote: ÔTo feed the world in the next 50 years we will need toproduce as much food as was produced in the last 10,000 years Éfood security will only be achieved, however, if regulations ongenetically modiÞed foods are adapted to reßect the reality that geneediting o.ers a precise, e.cient and safe method of improvingcrops.Õ Liar. People and the world are being targeted withaluminium through vaccines, chemtrails, food, drink cans, andendless other sources when aluminium has been linked to manyhealth issues including dementia which is increasing year aer year.Insects, bees and wildlife essential to the food chain are beingdeleted by pesticides, herbicides and radiation which 5G isdramatically increasing with 6G and 7G to come. The pollinating beepopulation is being devastated while wildlife including birds,dolphins and whales are having their natural radar blocked by thee.ects of ever-increasing radiation. In the summer windscreens usedto be splaere they. It doesnÕthappen now. Where have they gone?
Synthetic everything 
The Cult is introducing genetically-modiÞed versions of trees, plantsand insects including a Gates-funded project to unleash hundreds ofmillions of genetically-modiÞed, lab-altered and patented malemosquitoes to mate with wild mosquitoes and induce genetic ßawsthat cause them to die out. Clinically-insane Gates-funded Japaneseresearchers have developed mosquitos that spread vaccine and aredubbed Ôßying vaccinatorsÕ. Gates is funding the modiÞcation ofweather padioxide and heÕs funding geoengineering of the skies to change theatmosphere. Some of this came to light with the Gates-backed planto release tonnes of chalk into the atmosphere to Ôdeßect the Sun andcool the planetÕ. Funny how they do this while the heating e.ect ofthe Sun is not factored into climate projections focussed on carbondioxide. The reason is that they want to reduce carbon dioxide (sodonÕt mention the Sun), but at the same time they do want to reducethe impact of the Sun which is so essential to human life and health.I have mentioned the sun-cholesterol-vitamin D connection as theydemonise the Sun with warnings about skin cancer (caused by thechemicals in sun cream they tell you to splash on). They come fromthe other end of the process with statin drugs to reduce cholesterolthat turns sunlight into vitamin D. A lack of vitamin D leads to along list of health e.ects and how vitamin D levels must have fallenwith people conÞned to their homes over ÔCovidÕ. Gates is fundingother forms of geoengineering and most importantly chemtrailswhich are dropping heavy metals, aluminium and self-replicatingnanotechnology onto the Earth which is killing the natural world.See Everything You Need To Know, But Have Never Been Told for thedetailed background to this.
Every human system is being targeted for deletion by a force thatÕsnot human. The Wetiko Cult has embarked on the process oftransforming the human body from biological to synthetic biologicalas I have explained. Biological is being replaced by the artiÞcial andsynthetic Ð Archontic ÔcountermimicryÕ Ð right across human society.The plan eventually is to dispense with the human body altogetherand absorb human consciousness Ð which it wouldnÕt really be bythen Ð into cyberspace (the simulation which is Wetiko/Yaldabaoth).Preparations for that are already happening if people would care tolook. The alternative media rightly warns about globalism and ÔtheglobalistsÕ, but this is far bigger than that and represents the end ofthe human race as we know it. The Ôbad copyÕ of prime reality thatGnostics describe was a bad copy of harmony, wonder and beauty tostart with before Wetiko/Yaldabaoth set out to change the simulatedÔcopyÕ into something very di.erent. The process was slow to startwith. Entrapped humans in the simulation timeline were nottechnologically aware and they had to be brought up to intellectualspeed while being suppressed spiritually to the point where theycould build their own prison while having no idea they were doingso. We have now reached that stage where technological intellect hasthe potential to destroy us and thatÕs why events are moving so fast.Central American shaman Don Juan Matus said:
Think for a moment, and tell me how you would explain the contradictions between the intelligence of man the engineer and the stupidity of his systems of belief, or the stupidity of his contradictory behaviour. Sorcerers believe that the predators have given us our systems of beliefs, our ideas of good and evil; our social mores. They are the ones who set up our dreams of success or failure. They have given us covetousness, greed, and cowardice. It is the predator who makes us complacent, routinary, and egomaniacal. 
In order to keep us obedient and meek and weak, the predators engaged themselves in a stupendous manoeuvre Ð stupendous, of course, from the point of view of a fighting strategist; a horrendous manoeuvre from the point of those who suffer it. They gave us their mind. The predatorsÕ mind is baroque, contradictory, morose, filled with the fear of being discovered any minute now. 
For ÔpredatorsÕ see Wetiko, Archons, Yaldabaoth, Jinn, and all theother versions of the same phenomenon in cultures and religions allover the world. The theme is always the same because itÕs true anditÕs real. We have reached the point where we have to deal with it.The question is Ð how?
DonÕt fight Ð walk away 
I thought IÕd use a controversial subheading to get things moving interms of our response to global fascism. What do you mean ÔdonÕtÞghtÕ? What do you mean Ôwalk awayÕ? WeÕve got to Þght. We canÕtwalk away. Well, it depends what we mean by Þght and walk away.If Þghting means physical combat we are playing WetikoÕs game andfalling for its trap. It wants us to get angry, aggressive, and directhate and hostility at the enemy we think we must Þght. Every war,every baery conßict, has been fought with Wetiko leadingboth sides. ItÕs what it does. Wetiko wants a Þght, anywhere, anyplace. Just hit me, son, so I can hit you back. Wetiko hits Wetiko andWetiko hits Wetiko in return. I am very forthright as you can see inexposing Wetikos of the Cult, but I donÕt hate them. I refuse to hatethem. ItÕs what they want. What you hate you become. What youfight you become. Wokers, Ôanti-hatersÕ and Ôanti-fascistsÕ prove thisevery time they reach for their keyboards or don their balaclavas. Bywalk away I mean to disengage from Wetiko which includes ceasingto cooperate with its tyranny. Paul Levy says of Wetiko:
The way to ÔdefeatÕ evil is not to try to destroy it (for then, in playing evilÕs game, we have already lost), but rather, to find the invulnerable place within ourselves where evil is unable to vanquish us Ð this is to truly ÔwinÕ our battle with evil. 
Wetiko is everywhere in human society and itÕs been on steroidssince the ÔCovidÕ hoax. Every shouting match over wearing maskshas Wetiko wearing a mask and Wetiko not wearing one. ItÕs anelectrical circuit of push and resist, push and resist, with Wetikopushing and resisting. Each polarity is Wetiko empowering itself.Dictionary deÞnitions of ÔresistÕ include Ôopposing, refusing to acceptor comply withÕ and the word to focus on is ÔopposingÕ. What formdoes this take Ð secomply withÕ? The former is Wetiko opposing Wetiko while theother points the way forward. This is the di.erence between thoseaggressively demanding that government fascism must be obeyedwho stand in stark contrast to the great majority of Pushbackers. Wesaw this clearly with a march by thousands of Pushbackers againstlockdown in London followed days later by a Woker-h.ackedprotest in Bristol in which police cars were set on Þre. Masks werevirtually absent in London and widespread in Bristol. Wetiko wantslockdown on every level of society and infuses its aggression topolice it through its unknowing stooges. Lockdown protesters arethe ones with the smiling faces and the hugs, The two blatantlyobvious states of being Ð geresult of Wokers and their like becoming ever more inßuenced bythe simulation Field of Wetiko and Pushbackers ever moreinßuenced by The Field of a far higher vibration beyond thesimulation. Wetiko canÕt invade the heart which is where mostlockdown opponents are coming from. ItÕs the heart that allows themto see through the lies to the truth in ways I will be highlighting.
Renegade Minds know that calmness is the place from whichwisdom comes. You wonÕt Þnd wisdom in a hissing Þt and wisdomis what we need in abundance right now. Calmness is not weakness
Ð you donÕt have to scream at the top of your voice to be strong.Calmness is indeed a sign of strength. ÔNoÕ means IÕm not doing it.NOOOO!!! doesnÕt mean youÕre not doing it even more. Volumedoes not advance ÔNo Ð IÕm not doing itÕ. You are just not doing it.Wetiko possessed and inßuenced donÕt know how to deal with that.Wetiko wants a Þght and we should not give it one. What it needsmore than anything is our cooperation and we should not give thateither. Mass rallies and marches are great in that they are a visualrepresentation of feeling, but if it ends there they are irrelevant. Youdemand that Wetikos act di.erently? Well, theyÕre not going to arethey? They are Wetikos. We donÕt need to waste our time demandingthat something doesnÕt happen when that will make no di.erence.We need to delete the means that allows it to happen. This, invariably,is our cooperation. You can demand a child stop Þring a peashooterat the dog or you can refuse to buy the peashooter. If you providethe means you are cooperating with the dog being smacked on thenose with a pea. How can the authorities enforce mask-wearing ifmillions in a country refuse? What if the 74 million Pushbackers thatvoted for Trump in 2020 refused to wear masks, close theirbusinesses or stay in their homes. It would be unenforceable. Thefew control the many through the compliance of the many and thatÕsalways been the dynamic be it ÔCovidÕ regulations or the RomanEmpire. I know people can Þnd it intimidating to say no to authorityor stand out in a crowd for being the only one with a face on display;but it has to be done or itÕs over. I hope IÕve made clear in this bookthat where this is going will be far more intimidating than standingup now and saying ÔNoÕ Ð I will not cooperate with my ownenslavement and that of my children. There might be consequencesfor some initially, although not so if enough do the same. Thequestion that must be addressed is what is going to happen if wedonÕt? It is time to be strong and unyieldingly so. No means no. Nothere and there, but everywhere and always. I have refused to wear amask and obey all the other nonsense. I will not comply withtyranny. I repeat: Fascism is not imposed by fascists Ð there are neverenough of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescingto fascism. I will not do it. I will die Þrst, or my body will. Livingmeekly under fascism is a form of death anyway, the death of thespirit that Martin Luther King described.
Making things happen 
We must not despair. This is not over till itÕs over and itÕs far fromthat. The Ôfat ladyÕ must refuse to sing. The longer the ÔCovidÕ hoaxhas dragged on and impacted on more lives we have seen anawakening of phenomenal numbers of people worldwide to therealisation that what they have believed all their lives is not how theworld really is. Research published by the system-serving Universityof Bristol and KingÕs College London in February, 2021, concluded:ÔOne in every 11 people in Britain say they trust David IckeÕs take onthe coronavirus pandemic.Õ It will be more by now and we havegathering numbers to build on. We must urgently progress fromseeing the scam to ceasing to cooperate with it. Prominent Germanlawyer Reiner Fuellmich, also licenced to practice law in America, isdoing a magniÞcent job taking the legal route to bring thepsychopaths to justice through a second Nuremberg tribunal forcrimes against humanity. Fuellmich has an impressive record ofbeating the elite in court and he formed the German CoronaInvestigative Commiperpetrators with a view to triggering criminal charges. Mostimportantly he has grasped the foundation of the hoax Ð the PCRtest not testing for the ÔvirusÕ Ð and Christian Drosten is therefore onhis charge sheet along with Gates frontman Tedros at the WorldHealth Organization. Major players must be not be allowed to inßicttheir horrors on the human race without being brought to book. Alife sentence must follow for Bill Gates and the rest of them. A groupof researchers has also indicted the government of Norway forcrimes against humanity with copies sent to the police and theInternational Criminal Court. The lawsuit cites participation in aninternationally-planned false pandemic and violation ofinternational law and human rights, the European CommissionÕsdeÞnition of human rights by coercive rules, Nuremberg and Haguerules on fundamental human rights, and the Norwegianconstitution. We must take the initiative from hereon and not justcomplain, protest and react.
There are practical ways to support vital mass non-cooperation.Organising in numbers is one. Lockdown marches in London in thespring in 2021 were mass non-cooperation that the authorities couldnot stop. There were too many people. Hundreds of thousandswalked the London streets in the centre of the road for mile aermile while the Face-Nappies could only look on. They weredetermined, but calm, and just did it with no histrionics and lots ofsmiles. The police were impotent. Others are organising groupshopping without masks for mutual support and imagine if that washappening all over. Policing it would be impossible. If the storerefuses to serve people in these circumstances they would be facedwith a long line of trolleys full of goods standing on their own andeverything would have to be returned to the shelves. How wouldthey cope with that if it kept happening? I am talking here aboutmoving on from complaining to being pro-active; from watchingthings happen to making things happen. I include in this ourrelationship with the police. The behaviour of many Face-Nappieshas been disgraceful and anyone who thinks they would never Þndconcentration camp guards in the ÔenlightenedÕ modern era havehad that myth busted big-time. The period and seWetikos never do. I watched Þlm footage from a London march inwhich a police thug viciously kicked a protestor on the ßoor whohad done nothing. His fellow Face-Nappies stood in a ringprotecting him. What he did was a criminal assault and with acrowd far outnumbering the police this can no longer be allowed tohappen unchallenged. I get it when people chant Ôshame on youÕ inthese circumstances, but that is no longer enough. They have noshame those who do this. Crowds needs to start making a citizenÕsarrest of the police who commit criminal o.ences and brutally ainnocent people and defenceless women. A citizenÕs arrest can bemade under section 24A of the UK Police and Criminal Evidence(PACE) Act of 1984 and you will Þnd something similar in othercountries. I prefer to call it a Common Law arrest rather thancitizenÕs for reasons I will come to shortly. Anyone can arrest aperson commie reasonablegrounds to suspect they are commiboth counts the aould have fallen into thiscategory. A citizenÕs arrest can be made to stop someone:
¥
Causing physical injury to himself or any other person

¥
Su.ering physical injury

¥
Causing loss of or damage to property

¥
Making o. before a constable can assume responsibility for him


A citizenÕs arrest may also be made to prevent a breach of thepeace under Common Law and if they believe a breach of the peacewill happen or anything related to harm likely to be done or alreadydone in their presence. This is the way to go I think Ð the CommonLaw version. If police know that the crowd and members of thepublic will no longer be standing and watching while they committheir thuggery and crimes they will think twice about acting likeBrownshirts and Blackshirts.
Common Law Ð common sense 
Mention of Common Law is very important. Most people think thelaw is the law as in one law. This is not the case. There are twobodies of law, Common Law and Statute Law, and they are not thesame. Common Law is founded on the simple premise of do noharm. It does not recognise victimless crimes in which no harm isdone while Statute Law does. There is a Statute Law against almosteverything. So what is Statute Law? Amazingly itÕs the law of the sea that was brought ashore by the Cult to override the law of the landwhich is Common Law. They had no right to do this and as alwaysthey did it anyway. They had to. They could not impose their will onthe people through Common Law which only applies to do no harm.How could you stitch up the Þne detail of peopleÕs lives with that?Instead they took the law of the sea, or Admiralty Law, and appliedit to the population. Statute Law refers to all the laws spewing out ofgovernments and their agencies including all the fascist laws andregulations relating to ÔCovidÕ. The key point to make is that StatuteLaw is contract law. It only applies between contracting corporations.Most police o.cers donÕt even know this. They have to be kept inthe dark, too. Long ago when merchants and their sailing shipsbegan to trade with di.erent countries a contractual law wasdeveloped called Admiralty Law and other names. Again it onlyapplied to contracts agreed between corporate entities. If there is noagreed contract the law of the sea had no jurisdiction and that still applies to its new alias of Statute Law. The problem for the Cult whenthe law of the sea was brought ashore was an obvious one. Peoplewere not corporations and neither were government entities. Toovercome the laernments and all associatedorganisations corporations. All the institutions are private corporations and I mean governments and their agencies, localcouncils, police, courts, military, US states, the whole lot. Go to theDun and Bradstreet corporate listings website for conÞrmation thatthey are all corporations. You are arrested by a private corporationcalled the police by someone who is really a private security guardand they take you to court which is another private corporation.Neither have jurisdiction over you unless you consent and contract with them. This is why you hear the mantra about law enforcementpolicing by consent of the people. In truth the people ÔconsentÕ onlyin theory through monumental trickery.
Okay, the Cult overcame the corporate law problem by makinggovernments and institutions corporate entities; but what aboutpeople? They are not corporations are they? Ah ... well in a sense,and only a sense, they are. Not people exactly Ð the illusion ofpeople. The Cult creates a corporation in the name of everyone at thetime that their birth certiÞcate is issued. Note birth/ berth certiÞcateand when you go to court under the law of the sea on land you standin a dock. These are throwbacks to the origin. My Common Lawname is David Vaughan Icke. The name of the corporation createdby the government when I was born is called Mr David VaughanIcke usually wriVID VAUGHAN ICKE.That is not me, the living, breathing man. It is a Þctitious corporateentity. The trick is to make you think that David Vaughan Icke andMR DAVID VAUGHAN ICKE are the same thing. They are not. Whenpolice charge you and take you to court they are prosecuting thecorporate entity and not the living, breathing, man or woman. Theyhave to trick you into identifying as the corporate entity andcontracting with them. Otherwise they have no jurisdiction. They dothis through a language known as legalese. Lawful and legal are notthe same either. Lawful relates to Common Law and legal relates toStatute Law. Legalese is the language of Statue Law which usesterms that mean one thing to the public and another in legalese.Notice that when a police o.cer tells someone why they are beingcharged he or she will say at the end: ÔDo you understand?Õ To thepublic that means ÔDo you comprehend?Õ In legalese it means ÔDoyou stand under me?Õ Do you stand under my authority? If you sayyes to the question you are unknowingly agreeing to give themjurisdiction over you in a contract between two corporate entities.
This is a conÞdence trick in every way. Contracts have to be agreedbetween informed parties and if you donÕt know that DavidVaughan Icke is agreeing to be the corporation MR DAVIDVAUGHAN ICKE you cannot knowingly agree to contract. They aredeceiving you and another way they do this is to ask for proof ofidentity. You usually show them a driving licence or other documenton which your corporate name is wriou areaccepting that you are that corporate entity when you are not.Referring to yourself as a ÔpersonÕ or ÔcitizenÕ is also identifying withyour corporate Þction which is why I made the Common Law pointabout the citizenÕs arrest. If you are approached by a police o.ceryou identify yourself immediately as a living, breathing, man orwoman and say ÔI do not consent, I do not contract with you and I donot understandÕ or stand under their authority. I have a CommonLaw birth certiÞcate as a living man and these are available at nocharge from commonlawcourt.com. Businesses registered under theStatute Law system means that its laws apply. There are, however,ways to run a business under Common Law. Remember all ÔCovidÕlaws and regulations are Statute Law Ð the law of contracts and youdo not have to contract. This doesnÕt mean that you can kill someoneand get away with it. Common Law says do no harm and thatapplies to physical harm, Þnancial harm etc. Police are employees ofprivate corporations and there needs to be a new system of non-corporate Common Law constables operating outside the StatuteLaw system. If you go to davidicke.com and put Common Law intothe search engine you will Þnd videos that explain Common Law inmuch greater detail. It is deÞnitely a road we should walk.
With all my heart 
I have heard people say that we are in a spiritual war. I donÕt like theterm ÔwarÕ with its Wetiko dynamic, but I know what they mean.Sweep aside all the bodily forms and we are in a situation in whichtwo states of consciousness are seeking very di.erent realities.
Wetiko wants upheaval, chaos, fear, su.ering, conßict and control.The other wants love, peace, harmony, fairness and freedom. ThatÕswhere we are. We should not fall for the idea that Wetiko is all-powerful and thereÕs nothing we can do. Wetiko is not all-powerful.ItÕs a joke, pathetic. It doesnÕt have to be, but it has made that choicefor now. A handful of times over the years when I have felt thepresence of its frequency I have allowed it to aconsciously observe its nature. The experience is not pleasant, theenergy is heavy and dark, but the ease with which you can kick itback out the door shows that its real power is in persuading us thatit has power. ItÕs all a con. Wetiko is a con. ItÕs a trickster and not apower that can control us if we unleash our own. The con is foundedon manipulating humanity to give its power to Wetiko whichrecycles it back to present the illusion that it has power when itspower is ours that we gave away. This happens on an energetic leveland plays out in the world of the seen as humanity giving its powerto Wetiko authority which uses that power to control the populationwhen the power is only the power the population has handed over.How could it be any other way for billions to be controlled by arelative few? I have had experiences with people possessed byWetiko and again you can kick its arse if you do it with an openheart. Oh yes Ð the heart which can transform the world of perceivedÔmaÕ.
We are receiver-transmiwhat information and where from? Information is processed intoperception in three main areas Ð the brain, the heart and the belly.These relate to thinking, knowing, and emotion. Wetiko wants us tobe head and belly people which means we think within the conÞnesof the Matrix simulation and low-vibrational emotional reactionscrambles balance and perception. A few minutes on social mediaand you see how emotion is the dominant force. Woke is all emotionand is therefore thought-free and fact-free. Our heart is somethingdi.erent. It knows while the head thinks and has to try to work it outbecause it doesnÕt know. The human energy Þeld has seven primevortexes which connect us with wider reality (Fig 23). Chakra meansÔwheels of lightÕ in the Sanskrit language of ancient India. The mainones are: The crown chakra on top of the head; brow (or Ôthird eyeÕ)chakra in the centre of the forehead; throat chakra; heart chakra inthe centre of the chest; solar plexus chakra below the sternum; sacralchakra beneath the navel; and base chakra at the boEach one has a particular function or functions. We feel anxiety andnervousness in the belly where the sacral chakra is located and thisprocesses emotion that can a.ect the colon to give people Ôthe shitsÕor make them Ôshit scaredÕ when they are nervous. Chakras all playan important role, but the Mr and Mrs Big is the heart chakra whichsits at the centre of the seven, above the chakras that connect us tothe ÔphysicalÕ and below those that connect with higher realms (or atleast should). Here in the heart chakra we feel love, empathy andcompassion Ð ÔMy heart goes out to youÕ. Those with closed heartsbecome literally Ôheart-lessÕ in their aGates). Native Americans portrayed Wetiko with what Paul Levycalls a Ôfrigid, icy heart, devoid of mercyÕ (see Bill Gates).

Wetiko trembles at the thought of heart energy which it cannotinÞltrate. The frequency is too high. What it seeks to do instead isclose the heart chakra vortex to block its perceptual and energeticinßuence. Psychopaths have Ôhearts of stoneÕ and emotionally-damaged people have ÔheartacheÕ and Ôbroken heartsÕ. Theastonishing amount of heart disease is related to heart chakradisruption with its fundamental connection to the ÔphysicalÕ heart.Dr Tom Cowan has wribelief that the heart is a pump and making the connection betweenthe ÔphysicalÕ and spiritual heart. Rudolph Steiner who was wayahead of his time said the same about the fallacy that the heart is apump. What? The heart is not a pump? ThatÕs crazy, right?Everybody knows that. Read CowanÕs Human Heart, Cosmic Heart and you will realise that the very idea of the heart as a pump isridiculous when you see the evidence. How does blood in the feet sofar from the heart get pumped horizontally up the body by theheart?? Cowan explains in the book the real reason why bloodmoves as it does. Our ÔphysicalÕ heart is used to symbolise love whenthe source is really the heart vortex or spiritual heart which is ourmost powerful energetic connection to Ôout thereÕ expandedconsciousness. ThatÕs why we feel knowing Ð intuitive knowing Ð inthe centre of the chest. Knowing doesnÕt come from a process ofthoughts leading to a conclusion. It is there in an instant all in onego. Our heart knows because of its connection to levels of awarenessthat do know. This is the meaning and source of intuition Ð intuitiveknowing.
For the last more than 30 years of uncovering the global game andthe nature of reality my heart has been my constant antenna fortruth and accuracy. An American intelligence insider once said that Ihad quoted a disinformer in one of my books and yet I had onlyquoted the part that was true. He asked: ÔHow do you do that?Õ Byusing my heart antenna was the answer and anyone can do it. Heart.centred is how we are meant to be. With a closed heart chakra wewithdraw into a closed mind and the bubble of Þve-sense reality. Ifyou take a moment to focus your aourchest, picture a spinning wheel of light and see it opening andexpanding. You will feel it happening, too, and perceptions of theheart like joy and love as the heart impacts on the mind as theyinteract. The more the chakra opens the more you will feelexpressions of heart consciousness and as the process continues, andbecomes part of you, insights and knowings will follow. An openheart is connected to that level of awareness that knows all is One.You will see from its perspective that the fault-lines that divide usare only illusions to control us. An open heart does not process theillusions of race, creed and sexuality except as brief experiences for aconsciousness that is all. Our heart does not see division, only unity(Figs 24 and 25). ThereÕs something else, too. Our hearts love tolaugh. Mark TwainÕs quote that says ÔThe human race has one reallye.ective weapon, and that is laughterÕ is really a reference to theheart which loves to laugh with the joy of knowing the true nature ofinÞnite reality and that all the madness of human society is anillusion of the mind. Twain also said: ÔAgainst the assault of laughternothing can stand.Õ This is so true of Wetiko and the Cult. Theirinsecurity demands that they be taken seriously and their power andauthority acknowledged and feared. We should do nothing of thesort. We should not get aggressive or fearful which their insecurityso desires. We should laugh in their face. Even in their no-face aspolice come over in their face-nappies and expect to be takenseriously. They donÕt take themselves seriously looking like that sowhy should we? Laugh in the face of intimidation. Laugh in the faceof tyranny. You will see by its reaction that you have pressed all of itsbuetiko does not know what to do in the face of laughter orwhen its targets refuse to concede their joy to fear. We have seenmany examples during the ÔCovidÕ hoax when people haveexpressed their energetic power and the string puppets of Wetikoretreat with their tail limp between their knees. Laugh Ð the world isbloody mad aer all and if itÕs a choice between laughter and tears Iknow which way IÕm going.

Figure 24: Head consciousness without the heart sees division and everything apart from everything else. 

ÔVaccinesÕ and the soul 
The foundation of Wetiko/Archon control of humans is theseparation of incarnate Þve-sense mind from the inÞnite ÔIÕ andclosing the heart chakra where the True ÔIÕ lives during a human life.The goal has been to achieve complete separation in both cases. I wasinterested therefore to read an account by a French energetic healerof what she said she experienced with a patient who had been giventhe ÔCovidÕ vaccine. Genuine energy healers can sense informationand consciousness Þelds at di.erent levels of being which arereferred to as Ôsubtle bodiesÕ. She described treating the patient wholater returned aer having, without the healerÕs knowledge, twodoses of the ÔCovid vaccineÕ. The healer said:
I noticed immediately the change, very heavy energy emanating from [the] subtle bodies. The scariest thing was when I was working on the heart chakra, I connected with her soul: it was detached from the physical body, it had no contact and it was, as if it was floating in a state of total confusion: a damage to the consciousness that loses contact with the physical body, i.e. with our biological machine, there is no longer any communication between them. 
I continued the treatment by sending light to the heart chakra, the soul of the person, but it seemed that the soul could no longer receive any light, frequency or energy. It was a very powerful experience for me. Then I understood that this substance is indeed used to detach consciousness so that this consciousness can no longer interact through this body that it possesses in life, where there is no longer any contact, no frequency, no light, no more energetic balance or mind. 
This would create a human that is rudderless and at the extremealmost zombie-like operating with a fractional state of consciousnessat the mercy of Wetiko. I was especially intrigued by what the healersaid in the light of the prediction by the highly-informed RudolfSteiner more than a hundred years ago. He said:
In the future, we will eliminate the soul with medicine. Under the pretext of a Ôhealthy point of viewÕ, there will be a vaccine by which the human body will be treated as soon as possible directly at birth, so that the human being cannot develop the thought of the existence of soul and Spirit. To materialistic doctors will be entrusted the task of removing the soul of humanity. 
As today, people are vaccinated against this disease or that disease, so in the future, children will be vaccinated with a substance that can be produced precisely in such a way that people, thanks to this vaccination, will be immune to being subjected to the ÔmadnessÕ of spiritual life. He would be extremely smart, but he would not develop a conscience, and that is the true goal of some materialistic circles. 
Steiner said the vaccine would detach the physical body from theetheric body (subtle bodies) and Ôonce the etheric body is detachedthe relationship between the universe and the etheric body wouldbecome extremely unstable, and man would become an automatonÕ.He said Ôthe physical body of man must be polished on this Earth byspiritual will Ð so the vaccine becomes a kind of arymanique(Wetiko) forceÕ and Ôman can no longer get rid of a givenmaterialistic feelingÕ. Humans would then, he said, becomeÔmaterialistic of constitution and can no longer rise to the spiritualÕ. Ihave been writing for years about DNA being a receiver-transmiof information that connects us to other levels of reality and theseÔvaccinesÕ changing DNA can be likened to changing an antenna andwhat it can transmit and receive. Such a disconnection would clearlylead to changes in personality and perception. Steiner furtherpredicted the arrival of AI. Big Pharma ÔCovid vaccineÕ makers,expressions of Wetiko, are testing their DNA-manipulating evil onchildren as I write with a view to giving the ÔvaccineÕ to babies. If itÕsa soul-body disconnector Ð and I say that it is or can be Ð every childwould be disconnected from ÔsoulÕ at birth and the ÔvaccineÕ wouldcreate a closed system in which spiritual guidance from the greaterself would play no part. This has been the ambition of Wetiko allalong. A Pentagon video from 2005 was leaked of a presentationexplaining the development of vaccines to change behaviour by theire.ect on the brain. Those that believe this is not happening with theÔCovidÕ genetically-modifying procedure masquerading as aÔvaccineÕ should make an urgent appointment with NaivetyAnonymous. Klaus Schwab wrote in 2018:
Neurotechnologies enable us to better influence consciousness and thought and to understand many activities of the brain. They include decoding what we are thinking in fine levels of detail through new chemicals and interventions that can influence our brains to correct for errors or enhance functionality. 
The plan is clear and only the heart can stop it. With every heart thatopens, every mind that awakens, Wetiko is weakened. Heart andlove are far more powerful than head and hate and so nothing like amajority is needed to turn this around.
Beyond the Phantom 
Our heart is the prime target of Wetiko and so it must be the answerto Wetiko. We are our heart which is part of one heart, the inÞniteheart. Our heart is where the true self lives in a human life behindÞrewalls of Þve-sense illusion when an imposter takes its place ÐPhantom Self; but our heart waits patiently to be set free any time wechoose to see beyond the Phantom, beyond Wetiko. A WetikoedPhantom Self can wreak mass death and destruction while the loveof forever is locked away in its heart. The time is here to unleash itspower and let it sweep away the fear and despair that is Wetiko.Heart consciousness does not seek manipulated, censored,advantage for its belief or religion, its activism and desires. As anexpression of the One it treats all as One with the same rights tofreedom and opinion. Our heart demands fairness for itself no morethan for others. From this unity of heart we can come together inmutual support and transform this Wetikoed world into what realityis meant to be Ð a place of love, joy, happiness, fairness, justice andfreedom. Wetiko has another agenda and thatÕs why the world is asit is, but enough of this nonsense. Wetiko canÕt stay where hearts areopen and it works so hard to keep them closed. Fear is its currencyand its food source and love in its true sense has no fear. Why wouldlove have fear when it knows it is All That Is, Has Been, And Ever Can Be on an eternal exploration of all possibility? Love in this true senseis not the physical ae. This can be anexpression of it, yes, but InÞnite Love, a love without condition, goesfar deeper to the core of all being. It is the core of all being. InÞniterealty was born from love beyond the illusions of the simulation.Love inÞnitely expressed is the knowing that all is One and theswily-passing experience of separation is a temporaryhallucination. You cannot disconnect from Oneness; you can onlyperceive that you have and withdraw from its inßuence. This is themost important of all perception trickery by the mind parasite that isWetiko and the foundation of all its potential for manipulation.
If we open our hearts, open the sluice gates of the mind, andredeÞne self-identity amazing things start to happen. Consciousnessexpands or contracts in accordance with self-identity. When true selfis recognised as inÞnite awareness and label self Ð Phantom Self Ð isseen as only a series of brief experiences life is transformed.Consciousness expands to the extent that self-identity expands andeverything changes. You see unity, not division, the picture, not thepixels. From this we can play the long game. No more is anexperience something in and of itself, but a ßeeting moment in theeternity of forever. Suddenly people in uniform and dark suits are nolonger intimidating. Doing what your heart knows to be right is nolonger intimidating and consequences for those actions take on thesame nature of a brief experience that passes in the blink of aninÞnite eye. Intimidation is all in the mind. Beyond the mind there isno intimidation.
An open heart does not consider consequences for what it knowsto be right. To do so would be to consider not doing what it knows tobe right and for a heart in its power that is never an option. TheRenegade Mind is really the Renegade Heart. Consideration ofconsequences will always provide a getaway car for the mind andthe heart doesnÕt want one. What is right in the light of what we facetoday is to stop cooperating with Wetiko in all its forms and to do itwithout fear or compromise. You cannot compromise with tyrannywhen tyranny always demands more until it has everything. Life isyour perception and you are your destiny. Change your perceptionand you change your life. Change collective perception and wechange the world.
Come on people É One human family, One heart, One goal ÉFREEEEEEDOM!
We must se
Postscript 
The big scare story as the book goes to press is the ÔIndianÕvariant and the world is being deluged with propaganda aboutthe ÔCovid catastropheÕ in India which mirrors in its lies andmisrepresentations what happened in Italy before the Þrst lockdownin 2020.
The New York Post published a picture of someone who hadÔcollapsed in the street from CovidÕ in India in April, 2021, whichwas actually taken during a gas leak in May, 2020. Same old, sameold. Media articles in mid-February were asking why India had beenso untouched by ÔCovidÕ and then as their vaccine rollout gatheredpace the alleged ÔcasesÕ began to rapidly increase. Indian ÔCovidvaccineÕ maker Bharat Biotech was funded into existence by the Billand Melinda Gates Foundation (the pair announced their divorce inMay, 2021, which is a pity because they so deserve each other). TheIndian ÔCovid crisisÕ was ramped up by the media to terrify theworld and prepare people for submission to still more restrictions.The scam that worked the Þrst time was being repeated only with farmore people seeing through the deceit. Davidicke.com andIckonic.com have sought to tell the true story of what is happeningby talking to people living through the Indian nightmare which hasnothing to do with ÔCovidÕ. We posted a leAlishaÕ in Punewho told a very di.erent story to government and media mendacity.She said scenes of dying people and overwhelmed hospitals weredesigned to hide what was really happening Ð genocide andstarvation. Alisha said that millions had already died of starvationduring the ongoing lockdowns while government and media werelying and making it look like the ÔvirusÕ:
Restaurants, shops, gyms, theatres, basically everything is shut. The cities are ghost towns. Even so-called ÔessentialÕ businesses are only open till 11am in the morning. You basically have just an hour to buy food and then your time is up. 
Inter-state travel and even inter-district travel is banned. The cops wait at all major crossroads to question why you are traveling outdoors or to fine you if you are not wearing a mask. 
The medical community here is also complicit in genocide, lying about hospitals being full and turning away people with genuine illnesses, who need immediate care. They have even created a shortage of oxygen cylinders. 
This is the classic Cult modus operandi played out in every country.Alisha said that people who would not have a PCR test not testingfor the ÔvirusÕ were being denied hospital treatment. She said thepeople hit hardest were migrant workers and those in rural areas.Most businesses employed migrant workers and with everythingclosed there were no jobs, no income and no food. As a resultmillions were dying of starvation or malnutrition. All this washappening under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, a 100-percentasset of the Cult, and it emphasises yet again the scale of pure anti-human evil we are dealing with. Australia banned its people fromreturning home from India with penalties for trying to do so of up toÞve years in jail and a Þne of £37,000. The manufactured ÔCovidÕcrisis in India was being prepared to justify further fascism in theWest. Obvious connections could be seen between the IndianÔvaccineÕ programme and increased ÔcasesÕ and this became acommon theme. The Seychelles, the most per capita ÔCovidvaccinatedÕ population in the world, went back into lockdown aer aÔsurge of casesÕ.
Long ago the truly evil Monsanto agricultural biotechnologycorporation with its big connections to Bill Gates devastated Indianfarming with genetically-modiÞed crops. Human rights activistGurcharan Singh highlighted the e.orts by the Indian governmentto complete the job by destroying the food supply to hundreds ofmillions with ÔCovidÕ lockdowns. He said that 415 million people atthe boer theysay) were below the poverty line and struggled to feed themselvesevery year. Now the government was imposing lockdown at just thetime to destroy the harvest. This deliberate policy was leading tomass starvation. People may reel back at the suggestion that agovernment would do that, but Wetiko-controlled ÔleadersÕ arecapable of any level of evil. In fact what is described in India is in theprocess of being instigated worldwide. The food chain and foodsupply are being targeted at every level to cause world hunger andthus control. Bill Gates is not the biggest owner of farmland inAmerica for no reason and destroying access to food aids both thedepopulation agenda and the plan for synthetic ÔfoodÕ already beingfunded into existence by Gates. Add to this the coming hyper.inßation from the suicidal creation of fake ÔmoneyÕ in response toÔCovidÕ and the breakdown of container shipping systems and youhave a cocktail that can only lead one way and is meant to. The Cultplan is to crash the entire system to Ôbuild back beÕ with the GreatReset.
ÔVaccineÕ transmission 
Reports from all over the world continue to emerge of womensu.ering menstrual and fertility problems aer having the fakeÔvaccineÕ and of the non-ÕvaccinatedÕ having similar problems wheninteracting with the ÔvaccinatedÕ. There are far too many forÔcoincidenceÕ to be credible. WeÕve had menopausal women geperiods, others having periods stop or not stopping for weeks,passing clots, sometimes the lining of the uterus, breastirregularities, and miscarriages (which increased by 400 percent inparts of the United States). Non-ÔvaccinatedÕ men and children havesu.ered blood clots and nose bleeding aer interaction with theÔvaccinatedÕ. Babies have died from the e.ects of breast milk from aÔvaccinatedÕ mother. Awake doctors Ð the small minority Ðspeculated on the cause of non-ÕvaccinatedÕ su.ering the samee.ects as the ÔvaccinatedÕ. Was it nanotechnology in the syntheticsubstance transmias it a straight chemicalbioweapon that was being transmieen people? I am notsaying that some kind of chemical transmission is not one possibleanswer, but the foundation of all that the Cult does is frequency andthis is fertile ground for understanding how transmission canhappen. American doctor Carrie Madej, an internal medicinephysician and osteopath, has been practicing for the last 20 years,teaching medical students, and she says awhere the agenda for humanity was discussed. Madej, who operatesout of Georgia, did not dismiss other possible forms of transmission,but she focused on frequency in search of an explanation fortransmission. She said the Moderna and PÞzer ÔvaccinesÕ containednano-lipid particles as a key component. This was a brand newtechnology never before used on humanity. ÔTheyÕre using ananotechnology which is prenanobots or hydrogel.Õ Inside the ÔvaccinesÕ was Ôthis sci-Þ kind ofsubstanceÕ which suppressed immune checkpoints to get into thecell. I referred to this earlier as the ÔTrojan horseÕ technique thattricks the cell into opening a gateway for the self-replicatingsynthetic material and while the immune system is artiÞciallysuppressed the body has no defences. Madej said the substanceserved many purposes including an on-demand ability to Ôdeliverthe payloadÕ and using the nano Ôcomputer bitsÕ as biosensors in thebody. ÔIt actually has the ability to accumulate data from your body,like your breathing, your respiration, thoughts, emotions, all kindsof things.Õ
She said the technology obviously has the ability to operatethrough Wi-Fi and transmit and receive energy, messages,frequencies or impulses. ÔJust imagine youÕre gesubstance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G,your smart device, your phones.Õ We had something completelyforeign in the human body that had never been launched large scaleat a time when we were seeing 5G going into schools and hospitals(plus the Musk satellites) and she believed the ÔvaccineÕ transmissionhad something to do with this: ÔÉ if these people have this inside ofthem É it can act like an antenna and actually transmit it outwardlyas well.Õ The synthetic substance produced its own voltage and so itcould have that kind of e.ect. This Þts with my own contention thatthe nano receiver-transmiSmart Grid and break the receiver-transmiexpanded consciousness. That would explain the French energyhealerÕs experience of the disconnection of body from ÔsoulÕ withthose who have had the ÔvaccineÕ. The nanobots, self-replicatinginside the body, would also transmit the synthetic frequency whichcould be picked up through close interaction by those who have notbeen ÔvaccinatedÕ. Madej speculated that perhaps it was 5G andincreased levels of other radiation that was causing the symptomsdirectly although interestingly she said that non-ÔvaccinatedÕpatients had shown improvement when they were away from theÔvaccinatedÕ person they had interacted with. It must be rememberedthat you can control frequency and energy with your mind and youcan consciously create energetic barriers or bubbles with the mind tostop damaging frequencies from penetrating your Þeld. Americanpaediatrician Dr Larry Palevsky said the ÔvaccineÕ was not a ÔvaccineÕand was never designed to protect from a ÔviralÕ infection. He calledit Ôa massive, brilliant propaganda of genocideÕ because they didnÕthave to inject everyone to get the result they wanted. He said thecontent of the jabs was able to infuse any material into the brain,heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, sperm and female productive system.ÔThis is genocide; this is a weapon of mass destruction.Õ At the sametime American colleges were banning students from athey didnÕt have this life-changing and potentially life-endingÔvaccineÕ. Class action lawsuits must follow when the consequencesof this college fascism come to light. As the book was going to presscame reports about fertility e.ects on sperm in ÔvaccinatedÕ menwhich would absolutely Þt with what I have been saying andhospitals continued to Þll with ÔvaccineÕ reactions. Another questionis what about transmission via blood transfusions? The NHS hasextended blood donation restrictions from seven days aer a ÔCovidvaccinationÕ to 28 days aer even a sore arm reaction.
I said in the spring of 2020 that the then touted ÔCovid vaccineÕwould be ongoing each year like the ßu jab. A year later PÞzer CEO,the appalling Albert Bourla, said people would ÔlikelyÕ need aÔbooster doseÕ of the ÔvaccineÕ within 12 months of gevaccinatedÕ and then a yearly shot. ÔVariants will play a key roleÕ, hesaid conÞrming the point. Johnson & Johnson CEO Alex Gorsky alsotook time out from his ÔvaccineÕ disaster to say that people may needto be vaccinated against ÔCovid-19Õ each year. UK Health Secretary,the psychopath MaHancock, said additional ÔboostersÕ would beavailable in the autumn of 2021. This is the trap of the ÔvaccinepassportÕ. The public will have to accept every last ÔvaccineÕ theyintroduce, including for the fake ÔvariantsÕ, or it would cease to bevalid. The only other way in some cases would be continuous testingwith a test not testing for the ÔvirusÕ and what is on the swabsconstantly pushed up your noise towards the brain every time?
ÔVaccinesÕ changing behaviour 
I mentioned in the body of the book how I believed we would seegathering behaviour changes in the ÔvaccinatedÕ and I am alreadyhearing such comments from the non-ÔvaccinatedÕ describingbehaviour changes in friends, loved ones and work colleagues. Thiswill only increase as the self-replicating synthetic material andnanoparticles expand in body and brain. An article in the Guardian in2016 detailed research at the University of Virginia in Charlowhich developed a new method for controlling brain circuitsassociated with complex animal behaviour. The method, dubbedÔmagnetogeneticsÕ, involves genetically-engineering a protein calledferritin, which stores and releases iron, to create a magnetisedsubstance Ð ÔMagnetoÕ Ð that can activate speciÞc groups of nervecells from a distance. This is claimed to be an advance on othermethods of brain activity manipulation known as optogenetics andchemogenetics (the Cult has been developing methods of braincontrol for a long time). The ferritin technique is said to be non.invasive and able to activate neurons Ôrapidly and reversiblyÕ. Inother words, human thought and perception. The article said thatearlier studies revealed how nerve cell proteins Ôactivated by heatand mechanical pressure can be genetically engineered so that theybecome sensitive to radio waves and magnetic Þelds, by athem to an iron-storing protein called ferritin, or to inorganic
paramagnetic particlesÕ. Sensitive to radio waves and magneticÞelds? You mean like 5G, 6G and 7G? This is the human-AI SmartGrid hive mind we are talking about. The Guardian article said:
É the researchers injected Magneto into the striatum of freely behaving mice, a deep brain structure containing dopamine-producing neurons that are involved in reward and motivation, and then placed the animals into an apparatus split into magnetised and non-magnetised sections. 
Mice expressing Magneto spent far more time in the magnetised areas than mice that did not, because activation of the protein caused the striatal neurons expressing it to release dopamine, so that the mice found being in those areas rewarding. This shows that Magneto can remotely control the firing of neurons deep within the brain, and also control complex behaviours. 
Make no mistake this basic methodology will be part of the ÔCovidvaccineÕ cocktail and using magnetics to change brain functionthrough electromagnetic Þeld frequency activation. The Pentagon isdeveloping a ÔCovid vaccineÕ using ferritin. Magnetics would explainchanges in behaviour and why videos are appearing across theInternet as I write showing how magnets stick to the skin at thepoint of the ÔvaccineÕ shot. Once people take these ÔvaccinesÕanything becomes possible in terms of brain function and illnesswhich will be blamed on ÔCovid-19Õ and ÔvariantsÕ. Magnetic Þeldmanipulation would further explain why the non-ÔvaccinatedÕ arereporting the same symptoms as the ÔvaccinatedÕ they interact withand why those symptoms are reported to decrease when not in theircompany. Interestingly ÔMagnetoÕ, a ÔmutantÕ, is a character in theMarvel Comic X-Men stories with the ability to manipulate magneticÞelds and he believes that mutants should Þght back against theirhuman oppressors by any means necessary. The character was bornErik Lehnsherr to a Jewish family in Germany.
Cult-controlled courts 
The European Court of Human Rights opened the door formandatory ÔCovid-19 vaccinesÕ across the continent when it ruled ina Czech Republic dispute over childhood immunisation that legallyenforced vaccination could be Ônecessary in a democratic societyÕ.The 17 judges decided that compulsory vaccinations did not breachhuman rights law. On the face of it the judgement was so invertedyou gasp for air. If not having a vaccine infused into your body is nota human right then what is? Ah, but they said human rights lawwhich has been speciÞcally wribehest of the state (the Cult). Article 8 of the European Conventionon Human Rights relates to the right to a private life. The crucialword here is ÔexceptÕ:
There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right EXCEPT such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others [My emphasis]. 
No interference except in accordance with the law means there are noÔhuman rightsÕ except what EU governments decide you can have attheir behest. ÔAs is necessary in a democratic societyÕ explains thatreference in the judgement and Ôin the interests of national security,public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for theprevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health ormorals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of othersÕgives the EU a coach and horses to ride through Ôhuman rightsÕ andscabalance on government extremism; it is a vehicle to enforce it. Thisjudgement was almost laughably predictable when the last thing theCult wanted was a decision that went against mandatoryvaccination. Judges rule over and over again to beneÞt the system ofwhich they are a part. Vaccination disputes that come before themare invariably delivered in favour of doctors and authoritiesrepresenting the view of the state which owns the judiciary. Oh, yes,and we have even had calls to stop pucertiÞcates within 28 days of a Ôpositive testÕ because it is claimed thepractice makes the ÔvaccineÕ appear not to work. They are laughingat you.
The scale of madness, inhumanity and things to come washighlighted when those not ÔvaccinatedÕ for ÔCovidÕ were refusedevacuation from the Caribbean island of St Vincent during massivevolcanic eruptions. Cruise ships taking residents to the safety ofanother island allowed only the ÔvaccinatedÕ to board and the restwere le to their fate. Even in life and death situations like this wesee ÔCovidÕ stripping people of their most basic human instincts andthe insanity is even more extreme when you think that fakeÔvaccineÕ-makers are not even claiming their body-manipulatingconcoctions stop ÔinfectionÕ and ÔtransmissionÕ of a ÔvirusÕ thatdoesnÕt exist. St Vincent Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves said: ÔThechief medical o.cer will be identifying the persons alreadyvaccinated so that we can get them on the ship.Õ Note again thepower of the chief medical o.cer who, like Whianswering to the World Health Organization. This is the Cultnetwork structure that has overridden politicians who Ôfollow thescienceÕ which means doing what WHO-controlled Ômedical o.cersÕand Ôscience advisersÕ tell them. Gonsalves even said that residentswho were ÔvaccinatedÕ aer the order so they could board the shipswould still be refused entry due to possible side e.ects such asÔwooziness in the headÕ. The good news is that if they were woozyenough in the head they could qualify to be prime minister of StVincent.
Microchipping freedom 
The European judgement will be used at some point to justify movesto enforce the ÔCovidÕ DNA-manipulating procedure. Sandra Ro,CEO of the Global Blockchain Business Council, told a WorldEconomic Forum event that she hoped Ôvaccine passportsÕ wouldhelp to Ôdrive forced consent and standardisationÕ of global digitalidentity schemes: ÔIÕm hoping with the desire and global demand forsome sort of vaccine passport Ð so that people can get travelling andworking again Ð [it] will drive forced consent, standardisation, andfrankly, cooperation across the world.Õ The lady is either not verybright, or thoroughly mendacious, to use the term Ôforced consentÕ.
You do not ÔconsentÕ if you are forced Ð you submit. She wasdescribing what the plan has been all along and thatÕs to enforce adigital identity on every human without which they could notfunction. ÔVaccine passportsÕ are opening the door and are far fromthe end goal. A digital identity would allow you to be tracked ineverything you do in cyberspace and this is the same technique usedby Cult-owned China to enforce its social credit system of totalcontrol. The ultimate ÔpassportÕ is planned to be a microchip as mybooks have warned for nearly 30 years. Those nice people at thePentagon working for the Cult-controlled Defense AdvancedResearch Projects Agency (DARPA) claimed in April, 2021, theyhave developed a microchip inserted under the skin to detectÔasymptomatic Covid-19 infectionÕ before it becomes an outbreakand a Ôrevolutionary ÞlterÕ that can remove the ÔvirusÕ from theblood when athis are that the ÔvirusÕ does not exist and people transmiÔvirusÕ with no symptoms is brain-numbing bullshit. This is, ofcourse, not a ruse to get people to be microchipped for very di.erentreasons. DARPA also said it was producing a one-stop ÔvaccineÕ forthe ÔvirusÕ and all ÔvariantsÕ. One of the most sinister organisationson Planet Earth is doing this? Bee it then. These people areinsane because Wetiko that possesses them is insane.
Researchers from the Salk Institute in California announced theyhave created an embryo that is part human and part monkey. Mybooks going back to the 1990s have exposed experiments in topsecret underground facilities in the United States where humans arebeing crossed with animal and non-human ÔextraterrestrialÕ species.They are now easing that long-developed capability into the publicarena and there is much more to come given we are dealing withpsychiatric basket cases. Talking of which Ð Elon MuskÕs scientists atNeuralink trained a monkey to play Pong and other puzzles on acomputer screen using a joystick and when the monkey made thecorrect move a metal tube squirted banana smoothie into his mouthwhich is the basic technique for training humans into unquestioningcompliance. Two Neuralink chips were in the monkeyÕs skull andmore than 2,000 wires Ôfanned outÕ into its brain. Eventually themonkey played a video game purely with its brain waves.Psychopathic narcissist Musk said the ÔbreakthroughÕ was a steptowards puminds with artiÞcial intelligence. Exactly. This man is so dark andCult to his DNA.
World Economic Fascism (WEF) 
The World Economic Forum is telling you the plan by the statementsmade at its many and various events. Cult-owned fascist YouTubeCEO Susan Wojcicki spoke at the 2021 WEF Global TechnologyGovernance Summit (see the name) in which 40 governments and150 companies met to ensure Ôthe responsible design anddeployment of emerging technologiesÕ. Orwellian translation:ÔEnsuring the design and deployment of long-planned technologieswill advance the Cult agenda for control and censorship.Õ Freedom-destroyer and Nuremberg-bound Wojcicki expressed support fortech platforms like hers to censor content that is Ôtechnically legal butcould be harmfulÕ. Who decides what is ÔharmfulÕ? She does andthey do. ÔHarmfulÕ will be whatever the Cult doesnÕt want people tosee and we have legislation proposed by the UK government thatwould censor content on the basis of ÔharmÕ no mainformation is fair, legal and provably true. Make that especially if itis fair, legal and provably true. Wojcicki called for a global coalitionto be formed to enforce content moderation standards throughautomated censorship. This is a woman and mega-censor so self-deluded that she shamelessly accepted a Ôfree expressionÕ award ÐWojcicki Ð in an event sponsored by her own YouTube. They have noshame and no self-awareness.
You know that ÔCovidÕ is a scam and Wojcicki a Cult operativewhen YouTube is censoring medical and scientiÞc opinion purely onthe grounds of whether it supports or opposes the Cult ÔCovidÕnarrative. Florida governor Ron DeSantis compiled an expert panelwith four professors of medicine from Harvard, Oxford, andStanford Universities who spoke against forcing children andvaccinated people to wear masks. They also said there was no proofthat lockdowns reduced spread or death rates of ÔCovid-19Õ. Cult-gofer Wojcicki and her YouTube deleted the panel video Ôbecause itincluded content that contradicts the consensus of local and globalhealth authorities regarding the e.cacy of masks to prevent thespread of Covid-19Õ. This ÔconsensusÕ refers to what the Cult tells theWorld Health Organization to say and the WHO tells Ôlocal healthauthoritiesÕ to do. Wojcicki knows this, of course. The panellistspointed out that censorship of scientiÞc debate was responsible fordeaths from many causes, but Wojcicki couldnÕt care less. She wouldnot dare go against what she is told and as a disgrace to humanityshe wouldnÕt want to anyway. The UK government is seeking to passa fascist ÔOnline Safety BillÕ to speciÞcally target with massive Þnesand other means non-censored video and social media platforms tomake them censor Ôlawful but harmfulÕ content like the Cult-ownedFacebook, Twi, Google and YouTube. What is Ôlawful butharmfulÕ would be decided by the fascist Blair-created Ofcom.
Another WEF obsession is a cyber-aand this is clearly what the Cult has planned to take down the bankaccounts of everyone Ð except theirs. Those that think they haveenough money for the Cult agenda not to mae got abig lesson coming if they continue to ignore what is staring them inthe face. The World Economic Forum, funded by Gates and frontedby Klaus Schwab, announced it would be running a ÔsimulationÕwith the Russian government and global banks of just such an acalled Cyber Polygon 2021. What they simulate Ð as with the ÔCovidÕEvent 201 Ð they plan to instigate. The WEF is involved in a projectwith the Cult-owned Carnegie Endowment for International Peacecalled the WEF-Carnegie Cyber Policy Initiative which seeks tomerge Wall Street banks, ÔregulatorsÕ (I love it) and intelligenceagencies to ÔpreventÕ (arrange and allow) a cyber-aouldbring down the global Þnancial system as long planned by those thatcontrol the WEF and the Carnegie operation. The CarnegieEndowment for International Peace sent an instruction to First WorldWar US President Woodrow Wilson not to let the war end beforesociety had been irreversibly transformed.
The Wuhan lab diversion 
As I close, the Cult-controlled authorities and lapdog media aresystematically pushing Ôthe virus was released from the Wuhan labÕnarrative. There are two versions Ð it happened by accident and ithappened on purpose. Both are nonsense. The perceived existence ofthe never-shown-to-exist ÔvirusÕ is vital to sell the impression thatthere is actually an infective agent to deal with and to allow theendless potential for terrifying the population with ÔvariantsÕ of aÔvirusÕ that does not exist. The authorities at the time of writing aregoing with the Ôby accidentÕ while the alternative media ispromoting the Ôon purposeÕ. Cable news host Tucker Carlson whohas questioned aspects of lockdown and ÔvaccineÕ compulsion hasbought the Wuhan lab story. ÔEveryone now agreesÕ he said. Well, IdonÕt and many others donÕt and the question is why does the systemand its media suddenly ÔagreeÕ? When the media moves as one unitwith a narrative it is always a lie Ð witness the hour by hourmendacity of the ÔCovidÕ era. Why would this Cult-ownedcombination which has unleashed lies like machine gun Þresuddenly ÔagreeÕ to tell the truth??
Much of the alternative media is buying the lie because it Þts theconspiracy narrative, but itÕs the wrong conspiracy. The realconspiracy is that there is no virus and that is what the Cult isdesperate to hide. The idea that the ÔvirusÕ was released by accidentis ludicrous when the whole ÔCovidÕ hoax was clearly long-plannedand waiting to be played out as it was so fast in accordance with theRockefeller document and Event 201. So they prepared everything indetail over decades and then sat around strumming their Þngerswaiting for an ÔaccidentalÕ release from a bio-lab? What?? ItÕs crazy.Then thereÕs the Ôon purposeÕ claim. You want to circulate a ÔdeadlyvirusÕ and hide the fact that youÕve done so and you release it downthe street from the highest-level bio-lab in China? I repeat Ð What?? 
You would release it far from that lab to stop any association beingmade. But, no, weÕll do it in a place where the connection was certainto be made. Why would you need to scam ÔcasesÕ and ÔdeathsÕ andpay hospitals to diagnose ÔCovid-19Õ if you had a real ÔvirusÕ? Whatare sections of the alternative media doing believing this crap?Where were all the mass deaths in Wuhan from a Ôdeadly pathogenÕwhen the recovery to normal life aer the initial propaganda wasdramatic in speed? Why isnÕt the Ôdeadly pathogenÕ now circulatingall over China with bodies in the street? Once again we have thetechnique of tell them what they want to hear and they will likelybelieve it. The alternative media has its ÔconspiracyÕ and withCarlson it Þts with his ÔChina is the dangerÕ narrative over years.China is a danger as a global Cult operations centre, but not for thisreason. The Wuhan lab story also has the potential to instigateconßict with China when at some stage the plan is to trigger aProblem-Reaction-Solution confrontation with the West. Questioneverything Ð everything Ð and especially when the media agrees on acommon party line.
Third wave É fourth wave É fifth wave É 
As the book went into production the world was being set up formore lockdowns and a Ôthird waveÕ supported by invented ÔvariantsÕthat were increasing all the time and will continue to do so in publicstatements and computer programs, but not in reality. India becamethe new Italy in the ÔCovidÕ propaganda campaign and we were toldto be frightened of the new ÔIndian strainÕ. Somehow I couldnÕt Þndit within myself to do so. A document produced for the UKgovernment entitled ÔSummary of further modelling of easing ofrestrictions Ð Roadmap Step 2Õ declared that a third wave wasinevitable (of course when itÕs in the script) and it would be the faultof children and those who refuse the health-destroying fake ÔCovidvaccineÕ. One of the computer models involved came from the Cult-owned Imperial College and the other from Warwick Universitywhich I wouldnÕt trust to tell me the date in a calendar factory. Thedocument states that both models presumed extremely high uptakeof the ÔCovid vaccinesÕ and didnÕt allow for ÔvariantsÕ. The documentstates: ÔThe resurgence is a result of some people (mostly children)being ineligible for vaccination; others choosing not to receive thevaccine; and others being vaccinated but not perfectly protected.ÕThe mendacity takes the breath away. Okay, blame those with abrain who wonÕt take the DNA-modifying shots and put morepressure on children to have it as ÔtrialsÕ were underway involvingchildren as young as six months with parents who give insanity abad name. Massive pressure is being put on the young to have thefake ÔvaccineÕ and child age consent limits have been systematicallylowered around the world to stop parents intervening. Mostextraordinary about the document was its claim that the Ôthird waveÕwould be driven by Ôthe resurgence in both hospitalisations anddeaths É dominated by those that have received two doses of the vaccine,comprising around 60-70% of the wave respectivelyÕ. The predictedpeak of the Ôthird waveÕ suggested 300 deaths per day with 250 ofthem fully ÔvaccinatedÕ people. How many more lies do acquiescersneed to be told before they see the obvious? Those who took the jabto Ôprotect themselvesÕ are projected to be those who mostly get sickand die? So whatÕs in the ÔvaccineÕ? The document went on:
It is possible that a summer of low prevalence could be followed by substantial increases in incidence over the following autumn and winter. Low prevalence in late summer should not be taken as an indication that SARS-CoV-2 has retreated or that the population has high enough levels of immunity to prevent another wave. 
They are telling you the script and while many British peoplebelieved ÔCovidÕ restrictions would end in the summer of 2021 thegovernment was preparing for them to be ongoing. Authorities wereawarding contracts for ÔCovid marshalsÕ to police the restrictionswith contracts starting in July, 2021, and going through to January31st, 2022, and the government was advertising for ÔMedia BuyingServicesÕ to secure media propaganda slots worth a potential £320million for ÔCovid-19 campaignsÕ with a contract not ending untilMarch, 2022. The recipient Ð via a list of other front companies Ð wasreported to be American media marketing giant Omnicom GroupInc. While money is no object for ÔCovidÕ the UK waiting list for allother treatment Ð including life-threatening conditions Ð passed 4.5million. Meantime the Cult is seeking to control all o.cial ÔinquiriesÕto block revelations about what has really been happening and why.It must not be allowed to Ð we need Nuremberg jury trials in everycountry. The cover-up doesnÕt get more obvious than appointingultra-Zionist professor Philip Zelikow to oversee two dozen USvirologists, public health o.cials, clinicians, former governmento.cials and four American Ôcharitable foundationsÕ to Ôlearn thelessonsÕ of the ÔCovidÕ debacle. The personnel will be those thatcreated and perpetuated the ÔCovidÕ lies while Zelikow is the formerexecutive director of the 9/11 Commission who ensured that thetruth about those aer came out and produced a report thatmust be among the most mendacious and manipulative documentsever wriThe Trigger for the detailed exposure of the almostunimaginable 9/11 story in which Sabbatians can be found at everylevel.
Passive no more 
People are increasingly challenging the authorities with amazingnumbers of people taking to the streets in London well beyond theability of the Face-Nappies to stop them. Instead the Nappies choosesituations away from the mass crowds to target, intimidate, and seekto promote the impression of Ôviolent protestorsÕ. One such incidenthappened in LondonÕs Hyde Park. Hundreds of thousands walkingthrough the streets in protest against ÔCovidÕ fascism were ignoredby the Cult-owned BBC and most of the rest of the mainstreammedia, but they delighted in reporting how police were injured inÔclashes with protestorsÕ. The truth was that a group of peoplegathered in Hyde Park at the end of one march when most had gonehome and they were peacefully having a good time with music andchat. Face-Nappies who couldnÕt deal with the full-march crowdthen waded in with their batons and got more than they bargainedfor. Instead of just standing for this criminal brutality the crowdused their numerical superiority to push the Face-Nappies out of thepark. Eventually the Nappies turned and ran. Unfortunately two orthree idiots in the crowd threw drink cans striking two o.cerswhich gave the media and the government the image they wanted todiscredit the 99.9999 percent who were peaceful. The idiots walkedstraight into the trap and we must always be aware of potentialagent provocateurs used by the authorities to discredit their targets.
This response from the crowd Ð the can people apart Ð must be aturning point when the public no longer stand by while the innocentare arrested and brutally atmean to be violent, thatÕs the last thing we need. WeÕll leave theviolence to the Face-Nappies and government. But it does mean thatwhen the Face-Nappies use violence against peaceful people thenumerical superiority is employed to stop them and make citizenÕsarrests or Common Law arrests for a breach of the peace. The timefor being passive in the face of fascism is over.
We are the many, they are the few, and we need to make that countbefore there is no freedom le and our children and grandchildrenface an ongoing fascist nightmare.
COME ON PEOPLE Ð ITÕS TIME.
One final thought É 
The power of loveA force from aboveCleaning my soulFlame on burn desireLove with tongues of ÞrePurge the soulMake love your goal
IÕll protect you from the hooded clawKeep the vampires from your doorWhen the chips are down IÕll be aroundWith my undying, death-defyingLove for you
Envy will hurt itselfLet yourself be beautifulSparkling love, ßowersAnd pearls and preLove is like an energyRushinÕ rushinÕ inside of me
This time we go sublimeLovers entwine, divine, divine,Love is danger, love is pleasureLove is pure Ð the only treasure
IÕm so in love with youPurge the soulMake love your goal
The power of loveA force from aboveCleaning my soulThe power of loveA force from aboveA sky-scraping dove
Flame on burn desireLove with tongues of ÞrePurge the soulMake love your goal
Frankie Goes To Hollywood 
