

David Graeber and David Wengrow 
THE DAWN OF EVERYTHING 
A New History of Humanity 



Contents 
List of Maps and Figures 

Foreword and Dedication 

Acknowledgements 

1 Farewell to Humanity’s ChildhoodOr, why this is not a book about the origins of inequality 
2 Wicked Liberty
The indigenous critique and the myth of progress 

3 Unfreezing the Ice Age
In and out of chains: the protean possibilities of human politics 

4 Free People, the Origin of Cultures, and the Advent of PrivateProperty(Not necessarily in that order) 

5 Many Seasons AgoWhy Canadian foragers kept slaves and their Californianneighbours didn’t; or, the problem with ‘modes of production’ 

6 Gardens of Adonis 
The revolution that never happened: how Neolithic peoples avoidedagriculture 

7 The Ecology of Freedom
How farming ﬁrst hopped, stumbled and bluffed its way around theworld 

8 Imaginary Cities
Eurasia’s ﬁrst urbanites – in Mesopotamia, the Indus valley,Ukraine and China – and how they built cities without kings 

9 Hiding in Plain Sight
The indigenous origins of social housing and democracy in theAmericas 

10 Why the State Has No Origin
The humble beginnings of sovereignty, bureaucracy and politics 

11 Full Circle 
On the historical foundations of the indigenous critique 

12 Conclusion 
The dawn of everything 
Notes 

Bibliography 

Index 


About the Authors 
David Graeber was a professor of anthropology at the London School ofEconomics. He is the author of Debt: The First 5,000 Years and Bullshit Jobs: A Theory, and was a contributor to Harper’s Magazine, The Guardian, and The Bafﬂer. An iconic thinker and renowned activist, hisearly efforts helped to make Occupy Wall Street an era-deﬁning movement.He died on 2 September 2020. 
David Wengrow is a professor of comparative archaeology at the Instituteof Archaeology, University College London, and has been a visitingprofessor at New York University. He is the author of three books,including What Makes Civilization?. Wengrow conducts archaeologicalﬁeldwork in various parts of Africa and the Middle East. 
BY THE SAME AUTHORS 
David Graeber: 
Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coin of Our OwnDreams Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology Lost People: Magic and the Legacy of Slavery in Madagascar Direct Action: An Ethnography Debt: The First 5,000 Years The Democracy Project: A History, a Crisis, a Movement The Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity, and the Secret Joys ofBureaucracy Bullshit Jobs: A Theory 
David Wengrow: 
The Archaeology of Early Egypt: Social Transformations in North-EastAfrica, 10,000 to 2650 BC 
What Makes Civilization? The Ancient Near East and the Future of the West 
The Origins of Monsters: Image and Cognition in the First Age ofMechanical Reproduction 

List of Maps and Figures 
1 North America as deﬁned by early-twentieth-century ethnologists (inset:the ethno-linguistic ‘shatter zone’ of Northern California)(After C. D. Wissler (1913), ‘The North American Indians of the Plains’,Popular Science Monthly 82; A. L. Kroeber (1925), Handbook of the Indians of California. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 78.Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution.) 
2 The Fertile Crescent of the Middle East – Neolithic farmers in a world of Mesolithic hunter-foragers, 8500–8000 BC (Adapted from an original map by A. G. Sherratt, courtesy S. Sherratt.)
3 Independent centres of plant and animal domestication(Adapted from an original map, courtesy D. Fuller.) 
4 Nebelivka: a prehistoric ‘mega-site’ in the Ukrainian forest-steppe(Based an original map drawn by Y. Beadnell on the basis of data from D.Hale; courtesy J. Chapman and B. Gaydarska.)
5 Teotihuacan: residential apartments surrounding major monuments in thecentral districts (Adapted from R. Millon (1973), The Teotihuacán Map. Austin: University of Texas Press, courtesy the Teotihuacan Mapping Project and
M. E. Smith.)
6 Some key archaeological sites in the Mississippi River basin and adjacentregions(Adapted from an original map, courtesy T. R. Pauketat.) 
7 Above: arrangement of different clans (1–5) in an Osage village. Below:how representatives of the same clans arranged themselves inside a lodgefor a major ritual.(After A. C. Fletcher and F. La Flesche (1911), ‘The Omaha tribe’.Twenty-seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology,1905–6. Washington D.C.: Bureau of American Ethnology; and F. LaFlesche (1939), War Ceremony and Peace Ceremony of the Osage Indians. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 101. Washington: USGovernment.) 

Foreword and Dedication (by David Wengrow) 
David Rolfe Graeber died aged ﬁfty-nine on 2 September 2020, just overthree weeks after we ﬁnished writing this book, which had absorbed us formore than ten years. It began as a diversion from our more ‘serious’academic duties: an experiment, a game almost, in which an anthropologistand an archaeologist tried to reconstruct the sort of grand dialogue abouthuman history that was once quite common in our ﬁelds, but this time withmodern evidence. There were no rules or deadlines. We wrote as and when we felt like it, which increasingly became a daily occurrence. In the ﬁnalyears before its completion, as the project gained momentum, it was notuncommon for us to talk two or three times a day. We would often losetrack of who came up with what idea or which new set of facts andexamples; it all went into ‘the archive’, which quickly outgrew the scope ofa single book. The result is not a patchwork but a true synthesis. We couldsense our styles of writing and thought converging by increments into whateventually became a single stream. Realizing we didn’t want to end theintellectual journey we’d embarked on, and that many of the conceptsintroduced in this book would beneﬁt from further development andexempliﬁcation, we planned to write sequels: no less than three. But thisﬁrst book had to ﬁnish somewhere, and at 9.18 p.m. on 6 August DavidGraeber announced, with characteristic Twitter-ﬂair (and loosely citing JimMorrison), that it was done: ‘My brain feels bruised with numb surprise.’We got to the end just as we’d started, in dialogue, with drafts passingconstantly back and forth between us as we read, shared and discussed thesame sources, often into the small hours of the night. David was far morethan an anthropologist. He was an activist and public intellectual ofinternational repute who tried to live his ideas about social justice andliberation, giving hope to the oppressed and inspiring countless others tofollow suit. The book is dedicated to the fond memory of David Graeber (1961–2020) and, as he wished, to the memory of his parents, RuthRubinstein Graeber (1917–2006) and Kenneth Graeber (1914–1996). Maythey rest together in peace. 

Acknowledgements 
Sad circumstances oblige me (David Wengrow) to write theseacknowledgements in David Graeber’s absence. He is survived by his wifeNika. David’s passing was marked by an extraordinary outpouring of grief,which united people across continents, social classes and ideologicalboundaries. Ten years of writing and thinking together is a long time, and itis not for me to guess whom David would have wished to thank in thisparticular context. His co-travellers along the pathways that led to this bookwill already know who they are, and how much he treasured their support,care and advice. Of one thing I am certain: this book would not havehappened – or at least not in anything remotely like its present form –without the inspiration and energy of Melissa Flashman, our wise counsel atall times in all things literary. In Eric Chinski of Farrar, Straus and Girouxand Thomas Penn of Penguin UK we found a superb editorial team and trueintellectual partners. For their passionate engagements with andinterventions in our thinking over many years, heartfelt thanks to DebbieBookchin, Alpa Shah, Erhard Schüttpelz and Andrea Luka Zimmerman.For generous, expert guidance on different aspects of the book thanks to:Manuel Arroyo-Kalin, Elizabeth Baquedano, Nora Bateson, StephenBerquist, Nurit Bird-David, Maurice Bloch, David Carballo, JohnChapman, Luiz Costa, Philippe Descola, Aleksandr Diachenko, KevanEdinborough, Dorian Fuller, Bisserka Gaydarska, Colin Grier, ThomasGrisafﬁ, Chris Hann, Wendy James, Megan Laws, Patricia McAnany,Barbara Alice Mann, Simon Martin, Jens Notroff, José R. Oliver, MikeParker Pearson, Timothy Pauketat, Matthew Pope, Karen Radner, NatashaReynolds, Marshall Sahlins, James C. Scott, Stephen Shennan and MicheleWollstonecroft. 
A number of the arguments in this book were ﬁrst presented as namedlectures and in scholarly journals: an earlier version of Chapter Twoappeared in French as ‘La sagesse de Kandiaronk: la critique indigène, le mythe du progrès et la naissance de la Gauche’ (La Revue du MAUSS);parts of Chapter Three were ﬁrst presented as ‘Farewell to the childhood ofman: ritual, seasonality, and the origins of inequality’ (The 2014 HenryMyers Lecture, Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute); of ChapterFour as ‘Many seasons ago: slavery and its rejection among foragers on thePaciﬁc Coast of North America’ (American Anthropologist); and of ChapterEight as ‘Cities before the state in early Eurasia’ (The 2015 Jack GoodyLecture, Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology).
Thanks to the various academic institutions and research groups thatwelcomed us to speak and debate on topics relating to this book, andespecially to Enzo Rossi and Philippe Descola for memorable occasions atthe University of Amsterdam and the Collège de France. James Thomson(formerly editor-in-chief at Eurozine) ﬁrst helped us get our ideas out intothe wider world with the essay ‘How to change the course of human history(at least, the part that’s already happened)’, which he adopted withconviction when other publishing venues shied away; thanks also to themany translators who have extended its audience since; and to KellyBurdick of Lapham’s Quarterly for inviting our contribution to a specialissue on the theme of democracy, where we aired some of the ideas to befound here in Chapter Nine. 
From the very beginning, both David and I incorporated our work on thisbook into our teaching, respectively at the LSE Department ofAnthropology and the UCL Institute of Archaeology, so on behalf of bothof us I wish to thank our students of the last ten years for their manyinsights and reﬂections. Martin, Judy, Abigail and Jack Wengrow were bymy side every step of the way. My last and deepest thanks to EwaDomaradzka for providing both the sharpest criticism and the most devotedsupport a partner could wish for; you came into my life, much as David andthis book did: ‘Rain riding suddenly out of the air, Battering the bare wallsof the sun … Rain, rain on dry ground!’ 

1 

Farewell to Humanity’s Childhood 
Or, why this is not a book about the origins of inequality 
‘This mood makes itself felt everywhere, politically, socially, and
philosophically. We are living in what the Greeks called the ....ó.
(Kairos) – the right time – for a “metamorphosis of the gods,” i.e. of
the fundamental principles and symbols.’
C. G. Jung, The Undiscovered Self (1958) 
Most of human history is irreparably lost to us. Our species, Homo sapiens,has existed for at least 200,000 years, but for most of that time we have nextto no idea what was happening. In northern Spain, for instance, at the caveof Altamira, paintings and engravings were created over a period of at least10,000 years, between around 25,000 and 15,000 BC. Presumably, a lot ofdramatic events occurred during this period. We have no way of knowingwhat most of them were. 
This is of little consequence to most people, since most people rarelythink about the broad sweep of human history anyway. They don’t havemuch reason to. Insofar as the question comes up at all, it’s usually whenreﬂecting on why the world seems to be in such a mess and why humanbeings so often treat each other badly – the reasons for war, greed,exploitation, systematic indifference to others’ suffering. Were we alwayslike that, or did something, at some point, go terribly wrong?
It is basically a theological debate. Essentially the question is: arehumans innately good or innately evil? But if you think about it, thequestion, framed in these terms, makes very little sense. ‘Good’ and ‘evil’are purely human concepts. It would never occur to anyone to argue aboutwhether a ﬁsh, or a tree, were good or evil, because ‘good’ and ‘evil’ are concepts humans made up in order to compare ourselves with one another.It follows that arguing about whether humans are fundamentally good orevil makes about as much sense as arguing about whether humans arefundamentally fat or thin.
Nonetheless, on those occasions when people do reﬂect on the lessons ofprehistory, they almost invariably come back to questions of this kind. Weare all familiar with the Christian answer: people once lived in a state ofinnocence, yet were tainted by original sin. We desired to be godlike andhave been punished for it; now we live in a fallen state while hoping forfuture redemption. Today, the popular version of this story is typically someupdated variation on Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s Discourse on the Origin andthe Foundation of Inequality Among Mankind, which he wrote in 1754.Once upon a time, the story goes, we were hunter-gatherers, living in aprolonged state of childlike innocence, in tiny bands. These bands wereegalitarian; they could be for the very reason that they were so small. It wasonly after the ‘Agricultural Revolution’, and then still more the rise ofcities, that this happy condition came to an end, ushering in ‘civilization’and ‘the state’ – which also meant the appearance of written literature,science and philosophy, but at the same time, almost everything bad inhuman life: patriarchy, standing armies, mass executions and annoyingbureaucrats demanding that we spend much of our lives ﬁlling in forms.
Of course, this is a very crude simpliﬁcation, but it really does seem to bethe foundational story that rises to the surface whenever anyone, fromindustrial psychologists to revolutionary theorists, says something like ‘butof course human beings spent most of their evolutionary history living ingroups of ten or twenty people,’ or ‘agriculture was perhaps humanity’sworst mistake.’ And as we’ll see, many popular writers make the argumentquite explicitly. The problem is that anyone seeking an alternative to thisrather depressing view of history will quickly ﬁnd that the only one on offeris actually even worse: if not Rousseau, then Thomas Hobbes.
Hobbes’s Leviathan, published in 1651, is in many ways the foundingtext of modern political theory. It held that, humans being the selﬁshcreatures they are, life in an original State of Nature was in no senseinnocent; it must instead have been ‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short’
– basically, a state of war, with everybody ﬁghting against everybody else.Insofar as there has been any progress from this benighted state of affairs, aHobbesian would argue, it has been largely due to exactly those repressive mechanisms that Rousseau was complaining about: governments, courts,bureaucracies, police. This view of things has been around for a very longtime as well. There’s a reason why, in English, the words ‘politics’ ‘polite’and ‘police’ all sound the same – they’re all derived from the Greek wordpolis, or city, the Latin equivalent of which is civitas, which also gives us‘civility,’ ‘civic’ and a certain modern understanding of ‘civilization’.
Human society, in this view, is founded on the collective repression ofour baser instincts, which becomes all the more necessary when humans areliving in large numbers in the same place. The modern-day Hobbesian,then, would argue that, yes, we did live most of our evolutionary history intiny bands, who could get along mainly because they shared a commoninterest in the survival of their offspring (‘parental investment’, asevolutionary biologists call it). But even these were in no sense founded onequality. There was always, in this version, some ‘alpha-male’ leader.Hierarchy and domination, and cynical self-interest, have always been thebasis of human society. It’s just that, collectively, we have learned it’s to ouradvantage to prioritize our long-term interests over our short-term instincts;or, better, to create laws that force us to conﬁne our worst impulses tosocially useful areas like the economy, while forbidding them everywhereelse. 
As the reader can probably detect from our tone, we don’t much like thechoice between these two alternatives. Our objections can be classiﬁed intothree broad categories. As accounts of the general course of human history,they: 
1. 
simply aren’t true; 

2. 
have dire political implications;

3. 
make the past needlessly dull. 


This book is an attempt to begin to tell another, more hopeful and moreinteresting story; one which, at the same time, takes better account of whatthe last few decades of research have taught us. Partly, this is a matter ofbringing together evidence that has accumulated in archaeology,anthropology and kindred disciplines; evidence that points towards acompletely new account of how human societies developed over roughlythe last 30,000 years. Almost all of this research goes against the familiarnarrative, but too often the most remarkable discoveries remain conﬁned to the work of specialists, or have to be teased out by reading between thelines of scientiﬁc publications.
To give just a sense of how different the emerging picture is: it is clearnow that human societies before the advent of farming were not conﬁned tosmall, egalitarian bands. On the contrary, the world of hunter-gatherers as itexisted before the coming of agriculture was one of bold socialexperiments, resembling a carnival parade of political forms, far more thanit does the drab abstractions of evolutionary theory. Agriculture, in turn, didnot mean the inception of private property, nor did it mark an irreversiblestep towards inequality. In fact, many of the ﬁrst farming communities wererelatively free of ranks and hierarchies. And far from setting classdifferences in stone, a surprising number of the world’s earliest cities wereorganized on robustly egalitarian lines, with no need for authoritarian rulers,ambitious warrior-politicians, or even bossy administrators.
Information bearing on such issues has been pouring in from everyquarter of the globe. As a result, researchers around the world have alsobeen examining ethnographic and historical material in a new light. Thepieces now exist to create an entirely different world history – but so far,they remain hidden to all but a few privileged experts (and even the expertstend to hesitate before abandoning their own tiny part of the puzzle, tocompare notes with others outside their speciﬁc subﬁeld). Our aim in thisbook is to start putting some of the pieces of the puzzle together, in fullawareness that nobody yet has anything like a complete set. The task isimmense, and the issues so important, that it will take years of research anddebate even to begin to understand the real implications of the picture we’restarting to see. But it’s crucial that we set the process in motion. One thingthat will quickly become clear is that the prevalent ‘big picture’ of history –shared by modern-day followers of Hobbes and Rousseau alike – hasalmost nothing to do with the facts. But to begin making sense of the newinformation that’s now before our eyes, it is not enough to compile and siftvast quantities of data. A conceptual shift is also required.
To make that shift means retracing some of the initial steps that led to ourmodern notion of social evolution: the idea that human societies could be arranged according to stages of development, each with their owncharacteristic technologies and forms of organization (hunter-gatherers,farmers, urban-industrial society, and so on). As we will see, such notionshave their roots in a conservative backlash against critiques of European civilization, which began to gain ground in the early decades of theeighteenth century. The origins of that critique, however, lie not with thephilosophers of the Enlightenment (much though they initially admired andimitated it), but with indigenous commentators and observers of Europeansociety, such as the Native American (Huron-Wendat) statesmanKandiaronk, of whom we will learn much more in the next chapter.
Revisiting what we will call the ‘indigenous critique’ means takingseriously contributions to social thought that come from outside theEuropean canon, and in particular from those indigenous peoples whomWestern philosophers tend to cast either in the role of history’s angels or itsdevils. Both positions preclude any real possibility of intellectual exchange,or even dialogue: it’s just as hard to debate someone who is considereddiabolical as someone considered divine, as almost anything they think orsay is likely to be deemed either irrelevant or deeply profound. Most of thepeople we will be considering in this book are long since dead. It is nolonger possible to have any sort of conversation with them. We arenonetheless determined to write prehistory as if it consisted of people onewould have been able to talk to, when they were still alive – who don’t justexist as paragons, specimens, sock-puppets or playthings of someinexorable law of history.
There are, certainly, tendencies in history. Some are powerful; currents sostrong that they are very difﬁcult to swim against (though there alwaysseem to be some who manage to do it anyway). But the only ‘laws’ arethose we make up ourselves. Which brings us on to our second objection. 
WHY BOTH THE HOBBESIAN AND ROUSSEAUIAN VERSIONS 
OF HUMAN HISTORY HAVE DIRE POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS 
The political implications of the Hobbesian model need little elaboration. Itis a foundational assumption of our economic system that humans are atbase somewhat nasty and selﬁsh creatures, basing their decisions oncynical, egoistic calculation rather than altruism or co-operation; in whichcase, the best we can hope for are more sophisticated internal and externalcontrols on our supposedly innate drive towards accumulation and self-aggrandizement. Rousseau’s story about how humankind descended intoinequality from an original state of egalitarian innocence seems moreoptimistic (at least there was somewhere better to fall from), but nowadays it’s mostly deployed to convince us that while the system we live undermight be unjust, the most we can realistically aim for is a bit of modesttinkering. The term ‘inequality’ is itself very telling in this regard.
Since the ﬁnancial crash of 2008, and the upheavals that followed, thequestion of inequality – and with it, the long-term history of inequality –have become major topics for debate. Something of a consensus hasemerged among intellectuals and even, to some degree, the political classesthat levels of social inequality have got out of hand, and that most of theworld’s problems result, in one way or another, from an ever-widening gulfbetween the haves and the have-nots. Pointing this out is in itself achallenge to global power structures; at the same time, though, it frames theissue in a way that people who beneﬁt from those structures can still ﬁndultimately reassuring, since it implies no meaningful solution to theproblem would ever be possible.
After all, imagine we framed the problem differently, the way it mighthave been ﬁfty or 100 years ago: as the concentration of capital, oroligopoly, or class power. Compared to any of these, a word like‘inequality’ sounds like it’s practically designed to encourage half-measuresand compromise. It’s possible to imagine overthrowing capitalism orbreaking the power of the state, but it’s not clear what eliminatinginequality would even mean. (Which kind of inequality? Wealth?Opportunity? Exactly how equal would people have to be in order for us tobe able to say we’ve ‘eliminated inequality’?) The term ‘inequality’ is away of framing social problems appropriate to an age of technocraticreformers, who assume from the outset that no real vision of socialtransformation is even on the table. 
Debating inequality allows one to tinker with the numbers, argue aboutGini coefﬁcients and thresholds of dysfunction, readjust tax regimes orsocial welfare mechanisms, even shock the public with ﬁgures showing justhow bad things have become (‘Can you imagine? The richest 1 per cent ofthe world’s population own 44 per cent of the world’s wealth!’) – but it alsoallows one to do all this without addressing any of the factors that peopleactually object to about such ‘unequal’ social arrangements: for instance,that some manage to turn their wealth into power over others; or that otherpeople end up being told their needs are not important, and their lives haveno intrinsic worth. The last, we are supposed to believe, is just theinevitable effect of inequality; and inequality, the inevitable result of living in any large, complex, urban, technologically sophisticated society.Presumably it will always be with us. It’s just a matter of degree.
Today, there is a veritable boom of thinking about inequality: since 2011,‘global inequality’ has regularly featured as a top item for debate in theWorld Economic Forum at Davos. There are inequality indexes, institutesfor the study of inequality, and a relentless stream of publications trying toproject the current obsession with property distribution back into the StoneAge. There have even been attempts to calculate income levels and Ginicoefﬁcients for Palaeolithic mammoth hunters (they both turn out to be verylow).1 It’s almost as if we feel some need to come up with mathematicalformulae justifying the expression, already popular in the days of Rousseau,that in such societies ‘everyone was equal, because they were all equallypoor.’
The ultimate effect of all these stories about an original state ofinnocence and equality, like the use of the term ‘inequality’ itself, is tomake wistful pessimism about the human condition seem like commonsense: the natural result of viewing ourselves through history’s broad lens.Yes, living in a truly egalitarian society might be possible if you’re a Pygmyor a Kalahari Bushman. But if you want to create a society of true equalitytoday, you’re going to have to ﬁgure out a way to go back to becoming tinybands of foragers again with no signiﬁcant personal property. Since foragersrequire a pretty extensive territory to forage in, this would mean having toreduce the world’s population by something like 99.9 per cent. Otherwise,the best we can hope for is to adjust the size of the boot that will forever bestomping on our faces; or, perhaps, to wangle a bit more wiggle room inwhich some of us can temporarily duck out of its way. 
A ﬁrst step towards a more accurate, and hopeful, picture of world historymight be to abandon the Garden of Eden once and for all, and simply doaway with the notion that for hundreds of thousands of years, everyone onearth shared the same idyllic form of social organization. Strangely enough,though, this is often seen as a reactionary move. ‘So are you saying trueequality has never been achieved? That it’s therefore impossible?’ It seemsto us that such objections are both counterproductive and franklyunrealistic. 
First of all, it’s bizarre to imagine that, say, during the roughly 10,000(some would say more like 20,000) years in which people painted on the walls of Altamira, no one – not only in Altamira, but anywhere on earth –experimented with alternative forms of social organization. What’s thechance of that? Second of all, is not the capacity to experiment withdifferent forms of social organization itself a quintessential part of whatmakes us human? That is, beings with the capacity for self-creation, evenfreedom? The ultimate question of human history, as we’ll see, is not ourequal access to material resources (land, calories, means of production),much though these things are obviously important, but our equal capacity tocontribute to decisions about how to live together. Of course, to exercisethat capacity implies that there should be something meaningful to decide inthe ﬁrst place.
If, as many are suggesting, our species’ future now hinges on ourcapacity to create something different (say, a system in which wealth cannotbe freely transformed into power, or where some people are not told theirneeds are unimportant, or that their lives have no intrinsic worth), then whatultimately matters is whether we can rediscover the freedoms that make ushuman in the ﬁrst place. As long ago as 1936, the prehistorian V. GordonChilde wrote a book called Man Makes Himself. Apart from the sexistlanguage, this is the spirit we wish to invoke. We are projects of collectiveself-creation. What if we approached human history that way? What if wetreat people, from the beginning, as imaginative, intelligent, playfulcreatures who deserve to be understood as such? What if, instead of tellinga story about how our species fell from some idyllic state of equality, weask how we came to be trapped in such tight conceptual shackles that wecan no longer even imagine the possibility of reinventing ourselves? 
SOME BRIEF EXAMPLES OF WHY RECEIVED UNDERSTANDINGS OF THE BROAD SWEEP OF HUMAN HISTORY ARE MOSTLY WRONG (OR, THE ETERNAL RETURNOF JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU) 
When we ﬁrst embarked on this book, our intention was to seek newanswers to questions about the origins of social inequality. It didn’t takelong before we realized this simply wasn’t a very good approach. Framinghuman history in this way – which necessarily means assuming humanityonce existed in an idyllic state, and that a speciﬁc point can be identiﬁed atwhich everything started to go wrong – made it almost impossible to ask any of the questions we felt were genuinely interesting. It felt like almosteveryone else seemed to be caught in the same trap. Specialists wererefusing to generalize. Those few willing to stick their necks out almostinvariably reproduced some variation on Rousseau.
Let’s consider a fairly random example of one of these generalistaccounts, Francis Fukuyama’s The Origins of Political Order: FromPrehuman Times to the French Revolution (2011). Here is Fukuyama onwhat he feels can be taken as received wisdom about early human societies:‘In its early stages human political organization is similar to the band-levelsociety observed in higher primates like chimpanzees,’ which Fukuyamasuggests can be regarded as ‘a default form of social organization’. He thengoes on to assert that Rousseau was largely correct in pointing out that theorigin of political inequality lay in the development of agriculture, sincehunter-gatherer societies (according to Fukuyama) have no concept ofprivate property, and so little incentive to mark out a piece of land and say,‘This is mine.’ Band-level societies of this sort, he suggests, are ‘highlyegalitarian’.2 

Jared Diamond, in The World Until Yesterday: What Can We Learn fromTraditional Societies? (2012) suggests that such bands (in which hebelieves humans still lived ‘as recently as 11,000 years ago’) comprised‘just a few dozen individuals’, most biologically related. These smallgroups led a fairly meagre existence, ‘hunting and gathering whatever wildanimal and plant species happen to live in an acre of forest’. And theirsocial lives, according to Diamond, were enviably simple. Decisions werereached through ‘face-to-face discussion’; there were ‘few personalpossessions’ and ‘no formal political leadership or strong economicspecialization’.3 Diamond concludes that, sadly, it is only within suchprimordial groupings that humans ever achieved a signiﬁcant degree ofsocial equality.
For Diamond and Fukuyama, as for Rousseau some centuries earlier,what put an end to that equality – everywhere and forever – was theinvention of agriculture, and the higher population levels it sustained.Agriculture brought about a transition from ‘bands’ to ‘tribes’.Accumulation of food surplus fed population growth, leading some ‘tribes’to develop into ranked societies known as ‘chiefdoms’. Fukuyama paints analmost explicitly biblical picture of this process, a departure from Eden: ‘Aslittle bands of human beings migrated and adapted to different 
environments, they began their exit out of the state of nature by developingnew social institutions.’4 They fought wars over resources. Gangly andpubescent, these societies were clearly heading for trouble.
It was time to grow up and appoint some proper leadership. Hierarchiesbegan to emerge. There was no point in resisting, since hierarchy –according to Diamond and Fukuyama – is inevitable once humans adoptlarge, complex forms of organization. Even when the new leaders beganacting badly – creaming off agricultural surplus to promote their ﬂunkiesand relatives, making status permanent and hereditary, collecting trophyskulls and harems of slave-girls, or tearing out rivals’ hearts with obsidianknives – there could be no going back. Before long, chiefs had managed toconvince others they should be referred to as ‘kings’, even ‘emperors’. AsDiamond patiently explains to us: 
Large populations can’t function without leaders who make the
decisions, executives who carry out the decisions, and bureaucrats
who administer the decisions and laws. Alas for all of you readers
who are anarchists and dream of living without any state
government, those are the reasons why your dream is unrealistic:
you’ll have to ﬁnd some tiny band or tribe willing to accept you,
where no one is a stranger, and where kings, presidents, and
bureaucrats are unnecessary.5 

A dismal conclusion, not just for anarchists but for anybody who everwondered if there might be a viable alternative to the current status quo.Still, the truly remarkable thing is that, despite the self-assured tone, suchpronouncements are not actually based on any kind of scientiﬁc evidence.As we will soon be discovering, there is simply no reason to believe thatsmall-scale groups are especially likely to be egalitarian – or, conversely,that large ones must necessarily have kings, presidents or evenbureaucracies. Statements like these are just so many prejudices dressed upas facts, or even as laws of history.6 

ON THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS 
As we say, it’s all just an endless repetition of a story ﬁrst told by Rousseauin 1754. Many contemporary scholars will quite literally say that 
Rousseau’s vision has been proved correct. If so, it is an extraordinarycoincidence, since Rousseau himself never suggested that the innocent Stateof Nature really happened. On the contrary, he insisted he was engaging in athought experiment: ‘One must not take the kind of research which we enterinto as the pursuit of truths of history, but solely as hypothetical andconditional reasonings, better ﬁtted to clarify the nature of things than toexpose their actual origin …’7 

Rousseau’s portrayal of the State of Nature and how it was overturned bythe coming of agriculture was never intended to form the basis for a seriesof evolutionary stages, like the ones Scottish philosophers such as Smith,Ferguson or Millar (and later on, Lewis Henry Morgan) were referring towhen they spoke of ‘Savagery’ and ‘Barbarism’. In no sense was Rousseauimagining these different states of being as levels of social and moraldevelopment, corresponding to historical changes in modes of production:foraging, pastoralism, farming, industry. Rather, what Rousseau presentedwas more of a parable, by way of an attempt to explore a fundamentalparadox of human politics: how is it that our innate drive for freedomsomehow leads us, time and again, on a ‘spontaneous march to inequality’?
8 

Describing how the invention of farming ﬁrst leads to private property,and property to the need for civil government to protect it, this is howRousseau puts things: ‘All ran towards their chains, believing that theywere securing their liberty; for although they had reason enough to discernthe advantages of a civil order, they did not have experience enough toforesee the dangers.’9 His imaginary State of Nature was primarily invokedas a way of illustrating the point. True, he didn’t invent the concept: as arhetorical device, the State of Nature had already been used in Europeanphilosophy for a century. Widely deployed by natural law theorists, iteffectively allowed every thinker interested in the origins of government(Locke, Grotius and so on) to play God, each coming up with his ownvariant on humanity’s original condition, as a springboard for speculation.
Hobbes was doing much the same thing when he wrote in Leviathan that the primordial state of human society would necessarily have been a‘Bellum omnium contra omnes’, a war of all against all, which could onlybe overcome by the creation of an absolute sovereign power. He wasn’tsaying there had actually been a time when everyone lived in such aprimordial state. Some suspect that Hobbes’s state of war was really an allegory for his native England’s descent into civil war in the midseventeenth century, which drove the royalist author into exile in Paris.Whatever the case, the closest Hobbes himself came to suggesting this statereally existed was when he noted how the only people who weren’t underthe ultimate authority of some king were the kings themselves, and theyalways seemed to be at war with one another.
Despite all this, many modern writers treat Leviathan in the same wayothers treat Rousseau’s Discourse – as if it were laying the groundwork foran evolutionary study of history; and although the two have completelydifferent starting points, the result is rather similar.10 

‘When it came to violence in pre-state peoples,’ writes the psychologistSteven Pinker, ‘Hobbes and Rousseau were talking through their hats:neither knew a thing about life before civilization.’ On this point, Pinker isabsolutely right. In the same breath, however, he also asks us to believe thatHobbes, writing in 1651 (apparently through his hat), somehow managed toguess right, and come up with an analysis of violence and its causes inhuman history that is ‘as good as any today’.11 This would be an astonishing – not to mention damning – verdict on centuries of empiricalresearch, if it only happened to be true. As we’ll see, it is not even close.12 

We can take Pinker as our quintessential modern Hobbesian. In his magnum opus, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined (2012), and subsequent books like Enlightenment Now: The Casefor Reason, Science, Humanism, and Progress (2018) he argues that todaywe live in a world which is, overall, far less violent and cruel than anythingour ancestors had ever experienced.13 

Now, this may seem counter-intuitive to anyone who spends much timewatching the news, let alone who knows much about the history of thetwentieth century. Pinker, though, is conﬁdent that an objective statisticalanalysis, shorn of sentiment, will show us to be living in an age ofunprecedented peace and security. And this, he suggests, is the logicaloutcome of living in sovereign states, each with a monopoly over thelegitimate use of violence within its borders, as opposed to the ‘anarchicsocieties’ (as he calls them) of our deep evolutionary past, where life formost people was, indeed, typically ‘nasty, brutish, and short’.
Since, like Hobbes, Pinker is concerned with the origins of the state, hiskey point of transition is not the rise of farming but the emergence of cities. 
‘Archaeologists’, he writes, ‘tell us that humans lived in a state of anarchyuntil the emergence of civilization some ﬁve thousand years ago, whensedentary farmers ﬁrst coalesced into cities and states and developed theﬁrst governments.’14 What follows is, to put it bluntly, a modernpsychologist making it up as he goes along. You might hope that apassionate advocate of science would approach the topic scientiﬁcally,through a broad appraisal of the evidence – but this is precisely theapproach to human prehistory that Pinker seems to ﬁnd uninteresting.Instead he relies on anecdotes, images and individual sensationaldiscoveries, like the headline-making ﬁnd, in 1991, of ‘Ötzi the TyroleanIceman’. 
‘What is it about the ancients,’ Pinker asks at one point, ‘that theycouldn’t leave us an interesting corpse without resorting to foul play?’There is an obvious response to this: doesn’t it rather depend on whichcorpse you consider interesting in the ﬁrst place? Yes, a little over 5,000years ago someone walking through the Alps left the world of the livingwith an arrow in his side; but there’s no particular reason to treat Ötzi as aposter child for humanity in its original condition, other than, perhaps, Ötzisuiting Pinker’s argument. But if all we’re doing is cherry-picking, wecould just as easily have chosen the much earlier burial known toarchaeologists as Romito 2 (after the Calabrian rock-shelter where it wasfound). Let’s take a moment to consider what it would mean if we did this.
Romito 2 is the 10,000-year-old burial of a male with a rare geneticdisorder (acromesomelic dysplasia): a severe type of dwarﬁsm, which inlife would have rendered him both anomalous in his community and unableto participate in the kind of high-altitude hunting that was necessary fortheir survival. Studies of his pathology show that, despite generally poorlevels of health and nutrition, that same community of hunter-gatherers stilltook pains to support this individual through infancy and into earlyadulthood, granting him the same share of meat as everyone else, andultimately according him a careful, sheltered burial.15 

Neither is Romito 2 an isolated case. When archaeologists undertakebalanced appraisals of hunter-gatherer burials from the Palaeolithic, theyﬁnd high frequencies of health-related disabilities – but also surprisinglyhigh levels of care until the time of death (and beyond, since some of thesefunerals were remarkably lavish).16 If we did want to reach a generalconclusion about what form human societies originally took, based on statistical frequencies of health indicators from ancient burials, we wouldhave to reach the exact opposite conclusion to Hobbes (and Pinker): inorigin, it might be claimed, our species is a nurturing and care-givingspecies, and there was simply no need for life to be nasty, brutish or short.
We’re not suggesting we actually do this. As we’ll see, there is reason tobelieve that during the Palaeolithic, only rather unusual individuals wereburied at all. We just want to point out how easy it would be to play thesame game in the other direction – easy, but frankly not too enlightening.17 
As we get to grips with the actual evidence, we always ﬁnd that the realitiesof early human social life were far more complex, and a good deal moreinteresting, than any modern-day State of Nature theorist would ever belikely to guess. 
When it comes to cherry-picking anthropological case studies, and puttingthem forward as representative of our ‘contemporary ancestors’ – that is, asmodels for what humans might have been like in a State of Nature – thoseworking in the tradition of Rousseau tend to prefer African foragers like theHadza, Pygmies or !Kung. Those who follow Hobbes prefer the Yanomami.
The Yanomami are an indigenous population who live largely bygrowing plantains and cassava in the Amazon rainforest, their traditionalhomeland, on the border of southern Venezuela and northern Brazil. Sincethe 1970s, the Yanomami have acquired a reputation as the quintessentialviolent savages: ‘ﬁerce people’, as their most famous ethnographer,Napoleon Chagnon, called them. This seems decidedly unfair to theYanomami since, in fact, statistics show they’re not particularly violent –compared with other Amerindian groups, Yanomami homicide rates turnout average-to-low.18 Again, though, actual statistics turn out to matter lessthan the availability of dramatic images and anecdotes. The real reason theYanomami are so famous, and have such a colourful reputation, haseverything to do with Chagnon himself: his 1968 book Yanomamö: The Fierce People, which sold millions of copies, and also a series of ﬁlms,such as The Ax Fight, which offered viewers a vivid glimpse of tribalwarfare. For a while all this made Chagnon the world’s most famousanthropologist, in the process turning the Yanomami into a notorious casestudy of primitive violence and establishing their scientiﬁc importance inthe emerging ﬁeld of sociobiology. 
We should be fair to Chagnon (not everyone is). He never claimed theYanomami should be treated as living remnants of the Stone Age; indeed,he often noted that they obviously weren’t. At the same time, and somewhatunusually for an anthropologist, he tended to deﬁne them primarily in termsof things they lacked (e.g. written language, a police force, a formaljudiciary), as opposed to the positive features of their culture, which hasrather the same effect of setting them up as quintessential primitives.19 
Chagnon’s central argument was that adult Yanomami men achieve bothcultural and reproductive advantages by killing other adult men; and thatthis feedback between violence and biological ﬁtness – if generallyrepresentative of the early human condition – might have had evolutionaryconsequences for our species as a whole.20 

This is not just a big ‘if’ – it’s enormous. Other anthropologists startedraining down questions, not always friendly.21 Allegations of professionalmisconduct were levelled at Chagnon (mostly revolving around ethicalstandards in the ﬁeld), and everyone took sides. Some of these accusationsappear baseless, but the rhetoric of Chagnon’s defenders grew so heatedthat (as another celebrated anthropologist, Clifford Geertz, put it) not onlywas he held up as the epitome of rigorous, scientiﬁc anthropology, but allwho questioned him or his social Darwinism were excoriated as ‘Marxists’,‘liars’, ‘cultural anthropologists from the academic left’, ‘ayatollahs’ and‘politically correct bleeding hearts’. To this day, there is no easier way toget anthropologists to begin denouncing each other as extremists than tomention the name of Napoleon Chagnon.22 

The important point here is that, as a ‘non-state’ people, the Yanomamiare supposed to exemplify what Pinker calls the ‘Hobbesian trap’, wherebyindividuals in tribal societies ﬁnd themselves caught in repetitive cycles ofraiding and warfare, living fraught and precarious lives, always just a fewsteps away from violent death on the tip of a sharp weapon or at the end ofa vengeful club. That, Pinker tells us, is the kind of dismal fate ordained forus by evolution. We have only escaped it by virtue of our willingness toplace ourselves under the common protection of nation states, courts of lawand police forces; and also by embracing virtues of reasoned debate andself-control that Pinker sees as the exclusive heritage of a European‘civilizing process’, which produced the Age of Enlightenment (in otherwords, were it not for Voltaire, and the police, the knife-ﬁght overChagnon’s ﬁndings would have been physical, not just academic). 
There are many problems with this argument. We’ll start with the mostobvious. The idea that our current ideals of freedom, equality anddemocracy are somehow products of the ‘Western tradition’ would in facthave come as an enormous surprise to someone like Voltaire. As we’ll soonsee, the Enlightenment thinkers who propounded such ideals almostinvariably put them in the mouths of foreigners, even ‘savages’ like theYanomami. This is hardly surprising, since it’s almost impossible to ﬁnd asingle author in that Western tradition, from Plato to Marcus Aurelius toErasmus, who did not make it clear that they would have been opposed tosuch ideas. The word ‘democracy’ might have been invented in Europe(barely, since Greece at the time was much closer culturally to North Africaand the Middle East than it was to, say, England), but it’s almost impossibleto ﬁnd a single European author before the nineteenth century whosuggested it would be anything other than a terrible form of government.23 

For obvious reasons, Hobbes’s position tends to be favoured by those onthe right of the political spectrum, and Rousseau’s by those leaning left.Pinker positions himself as a rational centrist, condemning what heconsiders to be the extremists on either side. But why then insist that allsigniﬁcant forms of human progress before the twentieth century can beattributed only to that one group of humans who used to refer to themselvesas ‘the white race’ (and now, generally, call themselves by its moreaccepted synonym, ‘Western civilization’)? There is simply no reason tomake this move. It would be just as easy (actually, rather easier) to identifythings that can be interpreted as the ﬁrst stirrings of rationalism, legality,deliberative democracy and so forth all over the world, and only then tellthe story of how they coalesced into the current global system.24 

Insisting, to the contrary, that all good things come only from Europeensures one’s work can be read as a retroactive apology for genocide, since(apparently, for Pinker) the enslavement, rape, mass murder and destructionof whole civilizations – visited on the rest of the world by European powers
– is just another example of humans comporting themselves as they alwayshad; it was in no sense unusual. What was really signiﬁcant, so thisargument goes, is that it made possible the dissemination of what he takesto be ‘purely’ European notions of freedom, equality before the law, andhuman rights to the survivors.
Whatever the unpleasantness of the past, Pinker assures us, there is everyreason to be optimistic, indeed happy, about the overall path our species has taken. True, he does concede there is scope for some serious tinkering inareas like poverty reduction, income inequality or indeed peace andsecurity; but on balance – and relative to the number of people living onearth today – what we have now is a spectacular improvement on anythingour species accomplished in its history so far (unless you’re Black, or livein Syria, for example). Modern life is, for Pinker, in almost every waysuperior to what came before; and here he does produce elaborate statisticswhich purport to show how every day in every way – health, security,education, comfort, and by almost any other conceivable parameter –everything is actually getting better and better.
It’s hard to argue with the numbers, but as any statistician will tell you,statistics are only as good as the premises on which they are based. Has‘Western civilization’ really made life better for everyone? This ultimatelycomes down to the question of how to measure human happiness, which isa notoriously difﬁcult thing to do. About the only dependable way anyonehas ever discovered to determine whether one way of living is really moresatisfying, fulﬁlling, happy or otherwise preferable to any other is to allowpeople to fully experience both, give them a choice, then watch what theyactually do. For instance, if Pinker is correct, then any sane person who hadto choose between (a) the violent chaos and abject poverty of the ‘tribal’stage in human development and (b) the relative security and prosperity ofWestern civilization would not hesitate to leap for safety.25 

But empirical data is available here, and it suggests something is verywrong with Pinker’s conclusions. 
Over the last several centuries, there have been numerous occasions whenindividuals found themselves in a position to make precisely this choice –and they almost never go the way Pinker would have predicted. Some haveleft us clear, rational explanations for why they made the choices they did.Let us consider the case of Helena Valero, a Brazilian woman born into afamily of Spanish descent, whom Pinker mentions as a ‘white girl’abducted by Yanomami in 1932 while travelling with her parents along theremote Rio Dimití. 
For two decades, Valero lived with a series of Yanomami families,marrying twice, and eventually achieving a position of some importance inher community. Pinker brieﬂy cites the account Valero later gave of her ownlife, where she describes the brutality of a Yanomami raid.26 What he neglects to mention is that in 1956 she abandoned the Yanomami to seekher natal family and live again in ‘Western civilization,’ only to ﬁnd herselfin a state of occasional hunger and constant dejection and loneliness. Aftera while, given the ability to make a fully informed decision, Helena Valerodecided she preferred life among the Yanomami, and returned to live withthem.27 

Her story is by no means unusual. The colonial history of North andSouth America is full of accounts of settlers, captured or adopted byindigenous societies, being given the choice of where they wished to stayand almost invariably choosing to stay with the latter.28 This even appliedto abducted children. Confronted again with their biological parents, mostwould run back to their adoptive kin for protection.29 By contrast,Amerindians incorporated into European society by adoption or marriage,including those who – unlike the unfortunate Helena Valero – enjoyedconsiderable wealth and schooling, almost invariably did just the opposite:either escaping at the earliest opportunity, or – having tried their best toadjust, and ultimately failed – returning to indigenous society to live outtheir last days.
Among the most eloquent commentaries on this whole phenomenon is tobe found in a private letter written by Benjamin Franklin to a friend: 
When an Indian Child has been brought up among us, taught ourlanguage and habituated to our Customs, yet if he goes to see hisrelations and make one Indian Ramble with them there is no persuading him ever to return, and that this is not natural merely asIndians, but as men, is plain from this, that when white persons ofeither sex have been taken prisoner young by the Indians, and livedawhile among them, tho’ ransomed by their Friends, and treatedwith all imaginable tenderness to prevail with them to stay amongthe English, yet in a Short time they become disgusted with ourmanner of life, and the care and pains that are necessary to supportit, and take the ﬁrst opportunity of escaping again into the Woods,from whence there is no reclaiming them. One instance I rememberto have heard, where the person was to be brought home to possessa good Estate; but ﬁnding some care necessary to keep it together,he relinquished it to a younger brother, reserving to himself nothing but a gun and match-Coat, with which he took his way again to the
Wilderness.30 

Many who found themselves embroiled in such contests of civilization, ifwe may call them that, were able to offer clear reasons for their decisions tostay with their erstwhile captors. Some emphasized the virtues of freedomthey found in Native American societies, including sexual freedom, but alsofreedom from the expectation of constant toil in pursuit of land andwealth.31 Others noted the ‘Indian’s’ reluctance ever to let anyone fall intoa condition of poverty, hunger or destitution. It was not so much that theyfeared poverty themselves, but rather that they found life inﬁnitely morepleasant in a society where no one else was in a position of abject misery(perhaps much as Oscar Wilde declared he was an advocate of socialismbecause he didn’t like having to look at poor people or listen to theirstories). For anyone who has grown up in a city full of rough sleepers andpanhandlers – and that is, unfortunately, most of us – it is always a bitstartling to discover there’s nothing inevitable about any of this.
Still others noted the ease with which outsiders, taken in by ‘Indian’families, might achieve acceptance and prominent positions in theiradoptive communities, becoming members of chieﬂy households, or evenchiefs themselves.32 Western propagandists speak endlessly about equalityof opportunity; these seem to have been societies where it actually existed.By far the most common reasons, however, had to do with the intensity ofsocial bonds they experienced in Native American communities: qualitiesof mutual care, love and above all happiness, which they found impossibleto replicate once back in European settings. ‘Security’ takes many forms.There is the security of knowing one has a statistically smaller chance ofgetting shot with an arrow. And then there’s the security of knowing thatthere are people in the world who will care deeply if one is. 
HOW THE CONVENTIONAL NARRATIVE OF HUMAN HISTORY IS NOT ONLY WRONG, BUT QUITE NEEDLESSLYDULL 
One gets the sense that indigenous life was, to put it very crudely, just a lotmore interesting than life in a ‘Western’ town or city, especially insofar asthe latter involved long hours of monotonous, repetitive, conceptually empty activity. The fact that we ﬁnd it hard to imagine how such analternative life could be endlessly engaging and interesting is perhaps morea reﬂection on the limits of our imagination than on the life itself.
One of the most pernicious aspects of standard world-historical narrativesis precisely that they dry everything up, reduce people to cardboardstereotypes, simplify the issues (are we inherently selﬁsh and violent, orinnately kind and co-operative?) in ways that themselves undermine,possibly even destroy, our sense of human possibility. ‘Noble’ savages are,ultimately, just as boring as savage ones; more to the point, neither actuallyexist. Helena Valero was herself adamant on this point. The Yanomamiwere not devils, she insisted, neither were they angels. They were human,like the rest of us. 
Now, we should be clear here: social theory always, necessarily, involvesa bit of simpliﬁcation. For instance, almost any human action might be saidto have a political aspect, an economic aspect, a psycho-sexual aspect andso forth. Social theory is largely a game of make-believe in which wepretend, just for the sake of argument, that there’s just one thing going on:essentially, we reduce everything to a cartoon so as to be able to detectpatterns that would be otherwise invisible. As a result, all real progress insocial science has been rooted in the courage to say things that are, in theﬁnal analysis, slightly ridiculous: the work of Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud orClaude Lévi-Strauss being only particularly salient cases in point. One mustsimplify the world to discover something new about it. The problem comeswhen, long after the discovery has been made, people continue to simplify.
Hobbes and Rousseau told their contemporaries things that werestartling, profound and opened new doors of the imagination. Now theirideas are just tired common sense. There’s nothing in them that justiﬁes thecontinued simpliﬁcation of human affairs. If social scientists today continueto reduce past generations to simplistic, two-dimensional caricatures, it isnot so much to show us anything original, but just because they feel that’swhat social scientists are expected to do so as to appear ‘scientiﬁc’. Theactual result is to impoverish history – and as a consequence, to impoverishour sense of possibility. Let us end this introduction with an illustration,before moving on to the heart of the matter. 
Ever since Adam Smith, those trying to prove that contemporary forms ofcompetitive market exchange are rooted in human nature have pointed to the existence of what they call ‘primitive trade’. Already tens of thousandsof years ago, one can ﬁnd evidence of objects – very often precious stones,shells or other items of adornment – being moved around over enormousdistances. Often these were just the sort of objects that anthropologistswould later ﬁnd being used as ‘primitive currencies’ all over the world.Surely this must prove capitalism in some form or another has alwaysexisted? 
The logic is perfectly circular. If precious objects were moving longdistances, this is evidence of ‘trade’ and, if trade occurred, it must havetaken some sort of commercial form; therefore, the fact that, say, 3,000years ago Baltic amber found its way to the Mediterranean, or shells fromthe Gulf of Mexico were transported to Ohio, is proof that we are in thepresence of some embryonic form of market economy. Markets areuniversal. Therefore, there must have been a market. Therefore, markets areuniversal. And so on. 
All such authors are really saying is that they themselves cannotpersonally imagine any other way that precious objects might move about.But lack of imagination is not itself an argument. It’s almost as if thesewriters are afraid to suggest anything that seems original, or, if they do, feelobliged to use vaguely scientiﬁc-sounding language (‘trans-regionalinteraction spheres’, ‘multi-scalar networks of exchange’) to avoid havingto speculate about what precisely those things might be. In fact,anthropology provides endless illustrations of how valuable objects mighttravel long distances in the absence of anything that remotely resembles amarket economy.
The founding text of twentieth-century ethnography, Bronis.awMalinowski’s 1922 Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁc, describes how in the‘kula chain’ of the Massim Islands off Papua New Guinea, men wouldundertake daring expeditions across dangerous seas in outrigger canoes, justin order to exchange precious heirloom arm-shells and necklaces for eachother (each of the most important ones has its own name, and history offormer owners) – only to hold it brieﬂy, then pass it on again to a differentexpedition from another island. Heirloom treasures circle the island chaineternally, crossing hundreds of miles of ocean, arm-shells and necklaces inopposite directions. To an outsider, it seems senseless. To the men of theMassim it was the ultimate adventure, and nothing could be more importantthan to spread one’s name, in this fashion, to places one had never seen. 
Is this ‘trade’? Perhaps, but it would bend to breaking point our ordinaryunderstandings of what that word means. There is, in fact, a substantialethnographic literature on how such long-distance exchange operates insocieties without markets. Barter does occur: different groups may take onspecialities – one is famous for its feather-work, another provides salt, in athird all women are potters – to acquire things they cannot producethemselves; sometimes one group will specialize in the very business ofmoving people and things around. But we often ﬁnd such regional networksdeveloping largely for the sake of creating friendly mutual relations, orhaving an excuse to visit one another from time to time;33 and there are plenty of other possibilities that in no way resemble ‘trade’.
Let’s list just a few, all drawn from North American material, to give thereader a taste of what might really be going on when people speak of ‘long.distance interaction spheres’ in the human past: 
1. 
Dreams or vision quests: among Iroquoian-speaking peoples in thesixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was considered extremelyimportant literally to realize one’s dreams. Many European observersmarvelled at how Indians would be willing to travel for days to bringback some object, trophy, crystal or even an animal like a dog that theyhad dreamed of acquiring. Anyone who dreamed about a neighbour orrelative’s possession (a kettle, ornament, mask and so on) couldnormally demand it; as a result, such objects would often graduallytravel some way from town to town. On the Great Plains, decisions totravel long distances in search of rare or exotic items could form partof vision quests.34 


2. 
Travelling healers and entertainers: in 1528, when a shipwreckedSpaniard named Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca made his way fromFlorida across what is now Texas to Mexico, he found he could passeasily between villages (even villages at war with one another) byoffering his services as a magician and curer. Curers in much of NorthAmerica were also entertainers, and would often develop signiﬁcantentourages; those who felt their lives had been saved by theperformance would, typically, offer up all their material possessions tobe divided among the troupe.35 By such means, precious objects couldeasily travel very long distances. 

3. 
Women’s gambling: women in many indigenous North Americansocieties were inveterate gamblers; the women of adjacent villageswould often meet to play dice or a game played with a bowl and plumstone, and would typically bet their shell beads or other objects ofpersonal adornment as the stakes. One archaeologist versed in theethnographic literature, Warren DeBoer, estimates that many of theshells and other exotica discovered in sites halfway across thecontinent had got there by being endlessly wagered, and lost, in inter-village games of this sort, over very long periods of time.36 



We could multiply examples, but assume that by now the reader gets thebroader point we are making. When we simply guess as to what humans inother times and places might be up to, we almost invariably make guessesthat are far less interesting, far less quirky – in a word, far less human thanwhat was likely going on. 
ON WHAT’S TO FOLLOW 
In this book we will not only be presenting a new history of humankind, butinviting the reader into a new science of history, one that restores ourancestors to their full humanity. Rather than asking how we ended upunequal, we will start by asking how it was that ‘inequality’ became suchan issue to begin with, then gradually build up an alternative narrative thatcorresponds more closely to our current state of knowledge. If humans didnot spend 95 per cent of their evolutionary past in tiny bands of hunter-gatherers, what were they doing all that time? If agriculture, and cities, didnot mean a plunge into hierarchy and domination, then what did theyimply? What was really happening in those periods we usually see asmarking the emergence of ‘the state’? The answers are often unexpected,and suggest that the course of human history may be less set in stone, andmore full of playful possibilities, than we tend to assume.
In one sense, then, this book is simply trying to lay down foundations fora new world history, rather as Gordon Childe did when, back in the 1930s,he invented phrases like ‘the Neolithic Revolution’ or ‘the UrbanRevolution’. As such it is necessarily uneven and incomplete. At the sametime, this book is also something else: a quest to discover the rightquestions. If ‘what is the origin of inequality?’ is not the biggest question we should be asking about history, what then should it be? As the stories ofone-time captives escaping back to the woods again make clear, Rousseauwas not entirely mistaken. Something has been lost. He just had a ratheridiosyncratic (and ultimately, false) notion of what it was. How do wecharacterize it, then? And how lost is it really? What does it imply aboutpossibilities for social change today?
For about a decade now, we – that is, the two authors of this book – havebeen engaged in a prolonged conversation with each other about exactlythese questions. This is the reason for the book’s somewhat unusualstructure, which begins by tracing the historical roots of the question (‘whatis the origin of social inequality?’) back to a series of encounters betweenEuropean colonists and Native American intellectuals in the seventeenthcentury. The impact of those encounters upon what we now term theEnlightenment, and indeed our basic conceptions of human history, is bothmore subtle and profound than we usually care to admit. Revisiting them, aswe discovered, has startling implications for how we make sense of thehuman past today, including the origins of farming, property, cities,democracy, slavery and civilization itself. In the end, we decided to write abook that would echo, to some degree at least, that evolution in our ownthought. In those conversations, the real breakthrough moment came whenwe decided to move away from European thinkers like Rousseau entirely,and instead consider perspectives that derive from those indigenous thinkerswho ultimately inspired them.
So let us begin right there. 

2 

Wicked Liberty 
The indigenous critique and the myth of progress 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau left us a story about the origins of social inequalitythat continues to be told and retold, in endless variations, to this day. It isthe story of humanity’s original innocence, and unwitting departure from astate of pristine simplicity on a voyage of technological discovery thatwould ultimately guarantee both our ‘complexity’ and our enslavement.How did this ambivalent story of civilization come about?
Intellectual historians have never really abandoned the Great Man theoryof history. They often write as if all important ideas in a given age can betraced back to one or other extraordinary individual – whether Plato,Confucius, Adam Smith or Karl Marx – rather than seeing such authors’writings as particularly brilliant interventions in debates that were alreadygoing on in taverns or dinner parties or public gardens (or, for that matter,lecture rooms), but which otherwise might never have been written down.It’s a bit like pretending William Shakespeare had somehow invented theEnglish language. In fact, many of Shakespeare’s most brilliant turns ofphrase turn out to have been common expressions of the day, which anyElizabethan Englishman or woman would be likely to have thrown intocasual conversation, and whose authors remain as obscure as those ofknock-knock jokes – even if, were it not for Shakespeare, they’d probablyhave passed out of use and been forgotten long ago.
All this applies to Rousseau. Intellectual historians sometimes write as ifRousseau had personally kicked off the debate about social inequality withhis 1754 Discourse on the Origin and the Foundation of Inequality AmongMankind. In fact, he wrote it to submit to an essay contest on the subject. 
IN WHICH WE SHOW HOW CRITIQUES OF EUROCENTRISMCAN BACKFIRE, AND END UP TURNING ABORIGINALTHINKERS INTO ‘SOCK-PUPPETS’ 
In March 1754, the learned society known as the Académie des Sciences,Arts et Belles-Lettres de Dijon announced a national essay competition onthe question: ‘what is the origin of inequality among men, and is itauthorized by natural law?’ What we’d like to do in this chapter is ask: whyis it that a group of scholars in Ancien Régime France, hosting a nationalessay contest, would have felt this was an appropriate question in the ﬁrstplace? The way the question is put, after all, assumes that social inequalitydid have an origin; that is, it takes for granted that there was a time whenhuman beings were equals – and that something then happened to changethis situation. 
That is actually quite a startling thing for people living under anabsolutist monarchy like that of Louis XV to think. After all, it’s not as ifanyone in France at that time had much personal experience of living in asociety of equals. This was a culture in which almost every aspect of humaninteraction – whether eating, drinking, working or socializing – was markedby elaborate pecking orders and rituals of social deference. The authorswho submitted their essays to this competition were men who spent theirlives having all their needs attended to by servants. They lived off thepatronage of dukes and archbishops, and rarely entered a building withoutknowing the precise order of importance of everyone inside. Rousseau wasone such man: an ambitious young philosopher, he was at the time engagedin an elaborate project of trying to sleep his way into inﬂuence at court. Theclosest he’d likely ever come to experiencing social equality himself wassomeone doling out equal slices of cake at a dinner party. Yet everyone atthe time also agreed that this situation was somehow unnatural; that it hadnot always been that way.
If we want to understand why that was, we need to look not only atFrance, but also at France’s place in a much larger world. 
Fascination with the question of social inequality was relatively new in the1700s, and it had everything to do with the shock and confusion thatfollowed Europe’s sudden integration into a global economy, where it hadlong been a very minor player. 
In the Middle Ages, most people in other parts of the world who actuallyknew anything about northern Europe at all considered it an obscure anduninviting backwater full of religious fanatics who, aside from occasionalattacks on their neighbours (‘the Crusades’), were largely irrelevant toglobal trade and world politics.1 European intellectuals of that time werejust rediscovering Aristotle and the ancient world, and had very little ideawhat people were thinking and arguing about anywhere else. All thischanged, of course, in the late ﬁfteenth century, when Portuguese ﬂeetsbegan rounding Africa and bursting into the Indian Ocean – and especiallywith the Spanish conquest of the Americas. Suddenly, a few of the morepowerful European kingdoms found themselves in control of vast stretchesof the globe, and European intellectuals found themselves exposed, not onlyto the civilizations of China and India but to a whole plethora of previouslyunimagined social, scientiﬁc and political ideas. The ultimate result of thisﬂood of new ideas came to be known as the ‘Enlightenment’.
Of course, this isn’t usually the way historians of ideas tell this story. Notonly are we taught to think of intellectual history as something largelyproduced by individuals writing great books or thinking great thoughts, butthese ‘great thinkers’ are assumed to perform both these activities almostexclusively with reference to each other. As a result, even in cases whereEnlightenment thinkers openly insisted they were getting their ideas fromforeign sources (as the German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz didwhen he urged his compatriots to adopt Chinese models of statecraft),there’s a tendency for contemporary historians to insist they weren’t reallyserious; or else that when they said they were embracing Chinese, orPersian, or indigenous American ideas these weren’t really Chinese, Persianor indigenous American ideas at all but ones they themselves had made upand merely attributed to exotic Others.2 

These are remarkably arrogant assumptions – as if ‘Western thought’ (asit later came to be known) was such a powerful and monolithic body ofideas that no one else could possibly have any meaningful inﬂuence on it.It’s also pretty obviously untrue. Just consider the case of Leibniz: over thecourse of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, European governmentsgradually came to adopt the idea that every government should properlypreside over a population of largely uniform language and culture, run by abureaucratic ofﬁcialdom trained in the liberal arts whose members had succeeded in passing competitive exams. It might seem surprising that they did so, since nothing remotely like that had existed in any previous periodof European history. Yet it was almost exactly the system that had existedfor centuries in China. 
Are we really to insist that the advocacy of Chinese models of statecraftby Leibniz, his allies and followers really had nothing to do with the fact that Europeans did, in fact, adopt something that looks very much likeChinese models of statecraft? What is really unusual about this case is thatLeibniz was so honest about his intellectual inﬂuences. When he lived,Church authorities still wielded a great deal of power in most of Europe:anyone making an argument that non-Christian ways were in any waysuperior might ﬁnd themselves facing charges of atheism, which waspotentially a capital offence.3 

It is much the same with the question of inequality. If we ask, not ‘whatare the origins of social inequality?’ but ‘what are the origins of thequestion about the origins of social inequality?’ (in other words, how did itcome about that, in 1754, the Académie de Dijon would think this anappropriate question to ask?), then we are immediately confronted with along history of Europeans arguing with one another about the nature offaraway societies: in this case, particularly in the Eastern Woodlands ofNorth America. What’s more, a lot of those conversations make reference toarguments that took place between Europeans and indigenous Americansabout the nature of freedom, equality or for that matter rationality andrevealed religion – indeed, most of the themes that would later becomecentral to Enlightenment political thought.
Many inﬂuential Enlightenment thinkers did in fact claim that some oftheir ideas on the subject were directly taken from Native American sources
– even though, predictably, intellectual historians today insist this cannotreally be the case. Indigenous people are assumed to have lived in acompletely different universe, inhabited a different reality, even; anythingEuropeans said about them was simply a shadow-play projection, fantasiesof the ‘noble savage’ culled from the European tradition itself.4 

Of course, such historians typically frame this position as a critique ofWestern arrogance (‘how can you suggest that genocidal imperialists wereactually listening to those whose societies they were in the process ofstamping out?’), but it could equally well be seen as a form of Westernarrogance in its own right. There is no contesting that European traders,missionaries and settlers did actually engage in prolonged conversations with people they encountered in what they called the New World, and oftenlived among them for extended periods of time – even as they also colludedin their destruction. We also know that many of those living in Europe whocame to embrace principles of freedom and equality (principles barelyexisting in their countries a few generations before) claimed that accountsof these encounters had a profound inﬂuence on their thinking. To deny anypossibility that they were right is, effectively, to insist that indigenouspeople could not possibly have any real impact on history. It is, in fact, away of infantilizing non-Westerners: a practice denounced by these verysame authors. 
In recent years, a growing number of American scholars, mostthemselves of indigenous descent, have challenged these assumptions.5 
Here we follow in their footsteps. Basically, we are going to retell the story,starting from the assumption that all parties to the conversation betweenEuropean colonists and their indigenous interlocutors were adults, and that,at least occasionally, they actually listened to each other. If we do this, evenfamiliar histories suddenly begin to look very different. In fact, what we’llsee is not only that indigenous Americans – confronted with strangeforeigners – gradually developed their own, surprisingly consistent critiqueof European institutions, but that these critiques came to be taken veryseriously in Europe itself.
Just how seriously can hardly be overstated. For European audiences, theindigenous critique would come as a shock to the system, revealingpossibilities for human emancipation that, once disclosed, could hardly beignored. Indeed, the ideas expressed in that critique came to be perceived assuch a menace to the fabric of European society that an entire body oftheory was called into being, speciﬁcally to refute them. As we will shortlysee, the whole story we summarized in the last chapter – our standardhistorical meta-narrative about the ambivalent progress of humancivilization, where freedoms are lost as societies grow bigger and morecomplex – was invented largely for the purpose of neutralizing the threat ofindigenous critique. 
The ﬁrst thing to emphasize is that ‘the origin of social inequality’ is not aproblem which would have made sense to anyone in the Middle Ages.Ranks and hierarchies were assumed to have existed from the verybeginning. Even in the Garden of Eden, as the thirteenth-century philosopher Thomas Aquinas observed, Adam clearly outranked Eve.‘Social equality’ – and therefore, its opposite, inequality – simply did notexist as a concept. A recent survey of medieval literature by two Italianscholars in fact ﬁnds no evidence that the Latin terms aequalitas or inaequalitas or their English, French, Spanish, German and Italian cognateswere used to describe social relations at all before the time of Columbus. So one cannot even say that medieval thinkers rejected the notion of socialequality: the idea that it might exist seems never to have occurred to them.6 

In fact, the terms ‘equality’ and ‘inequality’ only began to enter commoncurrency in the early seventeenth century, under the inﬂuence of natural lawtheory. And natural law theory, in turn, arose largely in the course ofdebates about the moral and legal implications of Europe’s discoveries inthe New World. 
It’s important to remember that Spanish adventurers like Cortés andPizarro carried out their conquests largely without authorization fromhigher authorities; afterwards, there were intense debates back home overwhether such unvarnished aggression against people who, after all, posedno threat to Europeans could really be justiﬁed.7 The key problem was that
– unlike non-Christians of the Old World, who could be assumed to havehad the opportunity to learn the teachings of Jesus, and therefore to haveactively rejected them – it was fairly obvious that the inhabitants of theNew World simply never had any exposure to Christian ideas. So theycouldn’t be classed as inﬁdels. 
The conquistadors generally ﬁnessed this question by reading adeclaration in Latin calling on all the Indians to convert before attackingthem. Legal scholars in universities like Salamanca in Spain were notimpressed by this expedient. At the same time, attempts to write off theinhabitants of the Americas as so utterly alien that they fell outside thebounds of humanity entirely, and could be treated literally like animals, alsodidn’t ﬁnd much purchase. Even cannibals, the jurists noted, hadgovernments, societies and laws, and were able to construct arguments todefend the justice of their (cannibalistic) social arrangements; therefore theywere clearly humans, vested by God with powers of reason.
The legal and philosophical question then became: what rights do humanbeings have simply by dint of being human – that is, what rights could theybe said to have ‘naturally’, even if they existed in a State of Nature,innocent of the teachings of written philosophy and revealed religion, and without codiﬁed laws? The matter was hotly debated. We need not lingerhere on the exact formulae that natural law theorists came up with (sufﬁceto say, they did allow that Americans had natural rights, but ended upjustifying their conquest anyway, provided their subsequent treatment wasnot too violent or oppressive), but what is important, in this context, is thatthey opened a conceptual door. Writers like Thomas Hobbes, Hugo Grotiusor John Locke could skip past the biblical narratives everyone used to startwith, and begin instead with a question such as: what might humans havebeen like in a State of Nature, when all they had was their humanity?
Each of these authors populated the State of Nature with what they tookto be the simplest societies known in the Western Hemisphere, and thusthey concluded that the original state of humanity was one of freedom andequality, for better or worse (Hobbes, for example, deﬁnitely felt it wasworse). It’s important to stop here for a moment and consider why theycame to this verdict – because it was by no means an obvious or inevitableconclusion. 
First of all, while it may seem obvious to us, the fact that natural lawtheorists in the seventeenth century ﬁxed on apparently simple societies asexemplars of primordial times – societies like the Algonkians of NorthAmerica’s Eastern Woodlands, or the Caribs and Amazonians, rather thanurban civilizations like the Aztecs or Inca – would not have seemed obvious at the time. 
Earlier authors, confronted by a population of forest dwellers with noking and employing only stone tools, were unlikely to have seen them as inany way primordial. Sixteenth-century scholars, such as the Spanishmissionary José de Acosta, were more likely to conclude they were lookingat the fallen vestiges of some ancient civilization, or refugees who had, inthe course of their wanderings, forgotten the arts of metallurgy and civilgovernance. Such a conclusion would have made obvious common sensefor people who assumed that all truly important knowledge had beenrevealed by God at the beginning of time, that cities had existed before theFlood, and that saw their own intellectual life largely as attempts to recoverthe lost wisdom of ancient Greeks and Romans. 
History, in Renaissance Europe of the ﬁfteenth to sixteenth centuries, wasnot a story of progress. It was largely a series of disasters. Introducing theconcept of a State of Nature didn’t exactly ﬂip all this around, at least not immediately, but it did allow political philosophers after the seventeenthcentury to imagine people without the trappings of civilization as somethingother than degenerate savages; as a kind of humanity ‘in the raw’. And this,in turn, allowed them to ask a host of new questions about what it meant tobe human. What social forms would still exist, even among people who hadno recognizable form of law or government? Would marriage exist? Whatforms might it take? Would Natural Man tend to be naturally gregarious, orwould people tend to avoid one another? Was there such a thing as naturalreligion?
But the question still remains: why is it that by the eighteenth century,European intellectuals had come to ﬁx on the idea of primordial freedom or,especially, equality, to such an extent that it seemed perfectly natural to aska question like ‘what is the origin of inequality among men?’ This seemsparticularly odd considering how, prior to that time, most did not evenconsider social equality possible.
First of all, a qualiﬁcation is in order. A certain folk egalitarianismalready existed in the Middle Ages, coming to the fore during popularfestivals like carnival, May Day or Christmas, when much of societyrevelled in the idea of a ‘world turned upside down’, where all powers andauthorities were knocked to the ground or made a mockery of. Often thecelebrations were framed as a return to some primordial ‘age of equality’ –the Age of Cronus, or Saturn, or the land of Cockaygne. Sometimes, too,these ideals were invoked in popular revolts.
True, it’s never entirely clear how far such egalitarian ideals are merely aside effect of hierarchical social arrangements that obtained at ordinarytimes. Our notion that everyone is equal before the law, for instance,originally traces back to the idea that everyone is equal before the king, oremperor: since if one man is invested with absolute power, then obviouslyeveryone else is equal in comparison. Early Christianity similarly insistedthat all believers were (in some ultimate sense) equal in relation to God,whom they referred to as ‘the Lord’. As this illustrates, the overarchingpower under which ordinary mortals are all de facto equals need not be areal ﬂesh-and-blood human; one of the whole points of creating a ‘carnivalking’ or ‘May queen’ is that they exist in order to be dethroned.8 

Europeans educated in classical literature would also have been familiarwith speculation about long-ago, happy, egalitarian orders that appear inGreco-Roman sources; and notions of equality, at least among Christian nations, were to be found in the concept of res publica, or commonwealth,which again looked to ancient precedents. All this is only to say that a stateof equality was not utterly inconceivable to European intellectuals beforethe eighteenth century. None of it, however, explains why they came almostuniversally to assume that human beings, innocent of civilization, wouldever exist in such a state. True, there were classical precedents for suchideas, but there were classical precedents for the opposite as well.9 For answers, we must return to arguments deployed to establish that theinhabitants of the Americas were fellow humans to begin with: to assertthat, however exotic or even perverse their customs might seem, NativeAmericans were capable of making logical arguments in their own defence. 
What we’re going to suggest is that American intellectuals – we are usingthe term ‘American’ as it was used at the time, to refer to indigenousinhabitants of the Western Hemisphere; and ‘intellectual’ to refer to anyonein the habit of arguing about abstract ideas – actually played a role in thisconceptual revolution. It is very strange that this should be considered aparticularly radical idea, but among mainstream intellectual historians todayit is almost a heresy.
What makes this especially odd is that no one denies that many Europeanexplorers, missionaries, traders, settlers and others who sojourned onAmerican shores spent years learning native languages and perfecting theirskills in conversation with native speakers; just as indigenous Americansdid the work of learning Spanish, English, Dutch or French. Neither, wethink, would anyone who has ever learned a truly alien language deny thatdoing so takes a great deal of imaginative work, trying to grasp unfamiliarconcepts. We also know that missionaries typically conducted longphilosophical debates as part of their professional duties; many others, onboth sides, argued with one another either out of simple curiosity, orbecause they had immediate practical reasons to understand the other’spoint of view. Finally, no one would deny that travel literature, andmissionary relations – which often contained summaries of, or even extractsfrom, these exchanges – were popular literary genres, avidly followed byeducated Europeans. Any middle-class household in eighteenth-centuryAmsterdam or Grenoble would have been likely to have on its shelves at thevery least a copy of the Jesuit Relations of New France (as France’s NorthAmerican colonies were then known), and one or two accounts written by 
voyagers to faraway lands. Such books were appreciated largely becausethey contained surprising and unprecedented ideas.10 

Historians are aware of all this. Yet the overwhelming majority stillconclude that even when European authors explicitly say they areborrowing ideas, concepts and arguments from indigenous thinkers, oneshould not take them seriously. It’s all just supposed to be some kind ofmisunderstanding, fabrication, or at best a naive projection of pre-existingEuropean ideas. American intellectuals, when they appear in Europeanaccounts, are assumed to be mere representatives of some Westernarchetype of the ‘noble savage’ or sock-puppets, used as plausible alibis toan author who might otherwise get into trouble for presenting subversiveideas (deism, for example, or rational materialism, or unconventional viewson marriage).11 

Certainly, if one encounters an argument ascribed to a ‘savage’ in aEuropean text that even remotely resembles anything to be found in Ciceroor Erasmus, one is automatically supposed to assume that no ‘savage’ couldpossibly have really said it – or even that the conversation in question neverreally took place at all.12 If nothing else, this habit of thought is veryconvenient for students of Western literature, themselves trained in Ciceroand Erasmus, who might otherwise be forced to actually try to learnsomething about what indigenous people thought about the world, andabove all what they made of Europeans.
We intend to proceed in the opposite direction.
We will examine early missionary and travel accounts from New France
– especially the Great Lakes region – since these were the accountsRousseau himself was most familiar with, to get a sense of what itsindigenous inhabitants did actually think of French society, and how theycame to think of their own societies differently as a result. We will arguethat indigenous Americans did indeed develop a very strong critical view oftheir invaders’ institutions: a view which focused ﬁrst on these institutions’ lack of freedom, and only later, as they became more familiar withEuropean social arrangements, on equality.
One of the reasons that missionary and travel literature became sopopular in Europe was precisely because it exposed its readers to this kindof criticism, along with providing a sense of social possibility: theknowledge that familiar ways were not the only ways, since – as thesebooks showed – there were clearly societies in existence that did things very differently. We will suggest that there is a reason why so many keyEnlightenment thinkers insisted that their ideals of individual liberty andpolitical equality were inspired by Native American sources and examples.Because it was true. 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER WHAT THE INHABITANTS OF NEW FRANCE MADE OF THEIR EUROPEAN INVADERS,ESPECIALLY IN MATTERS OF GENEROSITY, SOCIABILITY,MATERIAL WEALTH, CRIME, PUNISHMENT AND LIBERTY 
The ‘Age of Reason’ was an age of debate. The Enlightenment was rootedin conversation; it took place largely in cafés and salons. Many classicEnlightenment texts took the form of dialogues; most cultivated an easy,transparent, conversational style clearly inspired by the salon. (It was theGermans, back then, who tended to write in the obscure style for whichFrench intellectuals have since become famous.) Appeal to ‘reason’ wasabove all a style of argument. The ideals of the French Revolution – liberty,equality and fraternity – took the form they did in the course of just such along series of debates and conversations. All we’re going to suggest here isthat those conversations stretched back further than Enlightenmenthistorians assume. 
Let’s begin by asking: what did the inhabitants of New France make ofthe Europeans who began to arrive on their shores in the sixteenth century?
At that time, the region that came to be known as New France wasinhabited largely by speakers of Montagnais-Naskapi, Algonkian andIroquoian languages. Those closer to the coast were ﬁshers, foresters andhunters, though most also practised horticulture; the Wendat (Huron),13 
concentrated in major river valleys further inland, growing maize, squashand beans around fortiﬁed towns. Interestingly, early French observersattached little importance to such economic distinctions, especially sinceforaging or farming was, in either case, largely women’s work. The men,they noted, were primarily occupied in hunting and, occasionally, war,which meant they could in a sense be considered natural aristocrats. Theidea of the ‘noble savage’ can be traced back to such estimations.Originally, it didn’t refer to nobility of character but simply to the fact thatthe Indian men concerned themselves with hunting and ﬁghting, which backat home were largely the business of noblemen. 
But if French assessments of the character of ‘savages’ tended to bedecidedly mixed, the indigenous assessment of French character wasdistinctly less so. Father Pierre Biard, for example, was a former theologyprofessor assigned in 1608 to evangelize the Algonkian-speaking Mi’kmaqin Nova Scotia, who had lived for some time next to a French fort. Biarddid not think much of the Mi’kmaq, but reported that the feeling wasmutual: ‘They consider themselves better than the French: “For,” they say,“you are always ﬁghting and quarrelling among yourselves; we livepeaceably. You are envious and are all the time slandering each other; youare thieves and deceivers; you are covetous, and are neither generous norkind; as for us, if we have a morsel of bread we share it with ourneighbour.” They are saying these and like things continually.’14 What seemed to irritate Biard the most was that the Mi’kmaq would constantlyassert that they were, as a result, ‘richer’ than the French. The French hadmore material possessions, the Mi’kmaq conceded; but they had other,greater assets: ease, comfort and time.
Twenty years later Brother Gabriel Sagard, a Recollect Friar,15 wrote similar things of the Wendat nation. Sagard was at ﬁrst highly critical ofWendat life, which he described as inherently sinful (he was obsessed withthe idea that Wendat women were all intent on seducing him), but by theend of his sojourn he had come to the conclusion their social arrangementswere in many ways superior to those at home in France. In the followingpassages he was clearly echoing Wendat opinion: ‘They have no lawsuitsand take little pains to acquire the goods of this life, for which weChristians torment ourselves so much, and for our excessive and insatiablegreed in acquiring them we are justly and with reason reproved by theirquiet life and tranquil dispositions.’16 Much like Biard’s Mi’kmaq, theWendat were particularly offended by the French lack of generosity to oneanother: ‘They reciprocate hospitality and give such assistance to oneanother that the necessities of all are provided for without there being anyindigent beggar in their towns and villages; and they considered it a verybad thing when they heard it said that there were in France a great many ofthese needy beggars, and thought that this was for lack of charity in us, andblamed us for it severely.’17 

Wendat cast a similarly jaundiced eye at French habits of conversation.Sagard was surprised and impressed by his hosts’ eloquence and powers ofreasoned argument, skills honed by near-daily public discussions of communal affairs; his hosts, in contrast, when they did get to see a group ofFrenchmen gathered together, often remarked on the way they seemed to beconstantly scrambling over each other and cutting each other off inconversation, employing weak arguments, and overall (or so the subtextseemed to be) not showing themselves to be particularly bright. People whotried to grab the stage, denying others the means to present their arguments,were acting in much the same way as those who grabbed the material meansof subsistence and refused to share it; it is hard to avoid the impression thatAmericans saw the French as existing in a kind of Hobbesian state of ‘warof all against all’. (It’s probably worthy of remark that especially in thisearly contact period, Americans were likely to have known Europeanslargely through missionaries, trappers, merchants and soldiers – that is,groups almost entirely composed of men. There were at ﬁrst very fewFrench women in the colonies, and fewer children. This probably had theeffect of making the competitiveness and lack of mutual care among themseem all the more extreme.)
Sagard’s account of his stay among the Wendat became an inﬂuentialbestseller in France and across Europe: both Locke and Voltaire cited Le grand voyage du pays des Hurons as a principal source for theirdescriptions of American societies. The multi-authored and much moreextensive Jesuit Relations, which appeared between 1633 and 1673, werealso widely read and debated in Europe, and include many a similarremonstrance aimed at the French by Wendat observers. One of the moststriking things about these seventy-one volumes of missionary ﬁeld reportsis that neither the Americans, nor their French interlocutors, appear to havehad very much to say about ‘equality’ per se – for example, the words égal or égalité barely appear, and on those very few occasions when they do it’salmost always in reference to ‘equality of the sexes’ (something the Jesuitsfound particularly scandalous).
This appears to be the case, irrespective of whether the Jesuits in questionwere arguing with the Wendat – who might not seem egalitarian inanthropological terms, since they had formal political ofﬁces and a stratumof war captives whom the Jesuits, at least, referred to as ‘slaves’ – or theMi’kmaq or Montagnais-Naskapi, who were organized into what lateranthropologists would consider egalitarian bands of hunter-gatherers.Instead, we hear a multiplicity of American voices complaining about the competitiveness and selﬁshness of the French – and even more, perhaps,about their hostility to freedom. 
That indigenous Americans lived in generally free societies, and thatEuropeans did not, was never really a matter of debate in these exchanges:both sides agreed this was the case. What they differed on was whether ornot individual liberty was desirable.
This is one area in which early missionary or travellers’ accounts of theAmericas pose a genuine conceptual challenge to most readers today. Mostof us simply take it for granted that ‘Western’ observers, even seventeenth-century ones, are simply an earlier version of ourselves; unlike indigenousAmericans, who represent an essentially alien, perhaps even unknowableOther. But in fact, in many ways, the authors of these texts were nothinglike us. When it came to questions of personal freedom, the equality of menand women, sexual mores or popular sovereignty – or even, for that matter,theories of depth psychology18 – indigenous American attitudes are likelyto be far closer to the reader’s own than seventeenth-century European ones. 
These differing views on individual liberty are especially striking.Nowadays, it’s almost impossible for anyone living in a liberal democracyto say they are against freedom – at least in the abstract (in practice, ofcourse, our ideas are usually much more nuanced). This is one of the lastinglegacies of the Enlightenment and of the American and French Revolutions.Personal freedom, we tend to believe, is inherently good (even if some of usalso feel that a society based on total individual liberty – one which took itso far as to eliminate police, prisons or any sort of apparatus of coercion –would instantly collapse into violent chaos). Seventeenth-century Jesuitsmost certainly did not share this assumption. They tended to viewindividual liberty as animalistic. In 1642, the Jesuit missionary Le Jeunewrote of the Montagnais-Naskapi: 
They imagine that they ought by right of birth, to enjoy the liberty
of wild ass colts, rendering no homage to any one whomsoever,
except when they like. They have reproached me a hundred times
because we fear our Captains, while they laugh at and make sport of
theirs. All the authority of their chief is in his tongue’s end; for he is
powerful in so far as he is eloquent; and, even if he kills himself talking and haranguing, he will not be obeyed unless he pleases the
Savages.19 

In the considered opinion of the Montagnais-Naskapi, however, the Frenchwere little better than slaves, living in constant terror of their superiors.Such criticism appears regularly in Jesuit accounts; what’s more, it comesnot just from those who lived in nomadic bands, but equally from townsfolklike the Wendat. The missionaries, moreover, were willing to concede thatthis wasn’t all just rhetoric on the Americans’ part. Even Wendat statesmencouldn’t compel anyone to do anything they didn’t wish to do. As FatherLallemant, whose correspondence provided an initial model for The Jesuit Relations, noted of the Wendat in 1644: 
I do not believe that there is any people on earth freer than they, and
less able to allow the subjection of their wills to any power whatever
– so much so that Fathers here have no control over their children,or Captains over their subjects, or the Laws of the country over anyof them, except in so far as each is pleased to submit to them. Thereis no punishment which is inﬂicted on the guilty, and no criminalwho is not sure that his life and property are in no danger … 20 

Lallemant’s account gives a sense of just how politically challenging someof the material to be found in the Jesuit Relations must have been to European audiences of the time, and why so many found it fascinating.After expanding on how scandalous it was that even murderers should getoff scot-free, the good father did admit that, when considered as a means ofkeeping the peace, the Wendat system of justice was not ineffective.Actually, it worked surprisingly well. Rather than punish culprits, theWendat insisted the culprit’s entire lineage or clan pay compensation. Thismade it everyone’s responsibility to keep their kindred under control. ‘It isnot the guilty who suffer the penalty,’ Lallemant explains, but rather ‘thepublic that must make amends for the offences of individuals.’ If a Huronhad killed an Algonquin or another Huron, the whole country assembled toagree the number of gifts due to the grieving relatives, ‘to stay thevengeance that they might take’.
Wendat ‘captains’, as Lallemant then goes on to describe, ‘urge theirsubjects to provide what is needed; no one is compelled to it, but those who are willing bring publicly what they wish to contribute; it seems as if theyvied with one another according to the amount of their wealth, and as thedesire of glory and of appearing solicitous for the public welfare urges themto do on like occasions.’ More remarkable still, he concedes: ‘this form ofjustice restrains all these peoples, and seems more effectually to repressdisorders than the personal punishment of criminals does in France,’ despitebeing ‘a very mild proceeding, which leaves individuals in such a spirit ofliberty that they never submit to any Laws and obey no other impulse thanthat of their own will’.21 

There are a number of things worth noting here. One is that it makesclear that some people were indeed considered wealthy. Wendat society wasnot ‘economically egalitarian’ in that sense. However, there was adifference between what we’d consider economic resources – like land,which was owned by families, worked by women, and whose products werelargely disposed of by women’s collectives – and the kind of ‘wealth’ beingreferred to here, such as wampum (a word applied to strings and belts ofbeads, manufactured from the shells of Long Island’s quahog clam) or othertreasures, which largely existed for political purposes.
Wealthy Wendat men hoarded such precious things largely to be able togive them away on dramatic occasions like these. Neither in the case ofland and agricultural products, nor that of wampum and similar valuables,was there any way to transform access to material resources into power – atleast, not the kind of power that might allow one to make others work foryou, or compel them to do anything they did not wish to do. At best, theaccumulation and adroit distribution of riches might make a man morelikely to aspire to political ofﬁce (to become a ‘chief’ or ‘captain’ – theFrench sources tend to use these terms in an indiscriminate fashion); but asthe Jesuits all continually emphasized, merely holding political ofﬁce didnot give anyone the right to give anybody orders either. Or, to becompletely accurate, an ofﬁce holder could give all the orders he or sheliked, but no one was under any particular obligation to follow them.
To the Jesuits, of course, all this was outrageous. In fact, their attitudetowards indigenous ideals of liberty is the exact opposite of the attitudemost French people or Canadians tend to hold today: that, in principle,freedom is an altogether admirable ideal. Father Lallemant, though, waswilling to admit that in practice such a system worked quite well; it created ‘much less disorder than there is in France’ – but, as he noted, the Jesuitswere opposed to freedom in principle: 
This, without doubt, is a disposition quite contrary to the spirit ofthe Faith, which requires us to submit not only our wills, but ourminds, our judgments, and all the sentiments of man to a powerunknown to our senses, to a Law that is not of earth, and that isentirely opposed to the laws and sentiments of corrupt nature. Addto this that the laws of the Country, which to them seem most just,attack the purity of the Christian life in a thousand ways, especiallyas regards their marriages … 22 

The Jesuit Relations are full of this sort of thing: scandalized missionariesfrequently reported that American women were considered to have fullcontrol over their own bodies, and that therefore unmarried women hadsexual liberty and married women could divorce at will. This, for theJesuits, was an outrage. Such sinful conduct, they believed, was just theextension of a more general principle of freedom, rooted in naturaldispositions, which they saw as inherently pernicious. The ‘wicked libertyof the savages’, one insisted, was the single greatest impediment to their‘submitting to the yoke of the law of God’.23 Even ﬁnding terms totranslate concepts like ‘lord’, ‘commandment’ or ‘obedience’ intoindigenous languages was extremely difﬁcult; explaining the underlyingtheological concepts, well-nigh impossible. 
IN WHICH WE SHOW HOW EUROPEANS LEARNED FROM (NATIVE) AMERICANS ABOUT THE CONNECTION BETWEENREASONED DEBATE, PERSONAL FREEDOMS AND THEREFUSAL OF ARBITRARY POWER 
In political terms, then, French and Americans were not arguing aboutequality but about freedom. About the only speciﬁc reference to politicalequality that appears in the seventy-one volumes of The Jesuit Relations occurs almost as an aside, in an account of an event in 1648. It happened ina settlement of Christianized Wendat near the town of Quebec. After adisturbance caused by a shipload of illegal liquor ﬁnding its way into thecommunity, the governor persuaded Wendat leaders to agree to a prohibition of alcoholic beverages, and published an edict to that effect –crucially, the governor notes, backed up by threat of punishment. FatherLallemant, again, records the story. For him, this was an epochal event: 
‘From the beginning of the world to the coming of the French, the
Savages have never known what it was so solemnly to forbid
anything to their people, under any penalty, however slight. They
are free people, each of whom considers himself of as much
consequence as the others; and they submit to their chiefs only in so
far as it pleases them.’24 

Equality here is a direct extension of freedom; indeed, is its expression. Italso has almost nothing in common with the more familiar (Eurasian)notion of ‘equality before the law’, which is ultimately equality before thesovereign – that is, once again, equality in common subjugation.Americans, by contrast, were equal insofar as they were equally free toobey or disobey orders as they saw ﬁt. The democratic governance of theWendat and Five Nations of the Haudenosaunee, which so impressed laterEuropean readers, was an expression of the same principle: if nocompulsion was allowed, then obviously such social coherence as did existhad to be created through reasoned debate, persuasive arguments and theestablishment of social consensus. 
Here we return to the matter with which we began: the EuropeanEnlightenment as the apotheosis of the principle of open and rationaldebate. We’ve already mentioned Sagard’s grudging respect for the Wendatfacility in logical argumentation (a theme that also runs through most Jesuitaccounts). At this point, it is important to bear in mind that the Jesuits werethe intellectuals of the Catholic world. Trained in classical rhetoric and techniques of disputation, Jesuits had learned the Americans’ languagesprimarily so as to be able to argue with them, to persuade them of thesuperiority of the Christian faith. Yet they regularly found themselvesstartled and impressed by the quality of the counterarguments they had tocontend with. 
How could such rhetorical facility have come to those with no awarenessof the works of Varro and Quintilian? In considering the matter, the Jesuitsalmost always noted the openness with which public affairs wereconducted. So, Father Le Jeune, Superior of the Jesuits in Canada in the 1630s: ‘There are almost none of them incapable of conversing or reasoningvery well, and in good terms, on matters within their knowledge. Thecouncils, held almost every day in the Villages, and on almost all matters,improve their capacity for talking.’ Or, in Lallemant’s words: ‘I can say intruth that, as regards intelligence, they are in no wise inferior to Europeansand to those who dwell in France. I would never have believed that, withoutinstruction, nature could have supplied a most ready and vigorouseloquence, which I have admired in many Hurons; or more clear-sightedness in public affairs, or a more discreet management in things towhich they are accustomed.’25 Some Jesuits went further, remarking – notwithout a trace of frustration – that New World savages seemed rathercleverer overall than the people they were used to dealing with at home
(e.g. ‘they nearly all show more intelligence in their business, speeches,courtesies, intercourse, tricks, and subtleties, than do the shrewdest citizensand merchants in France’).26 

Jesuits, then, clearly recognized and acknowledged an intrinsic relationbetween refusal of arbitrary power, open and inclusive political debate anda taste for reasoned argument. It’s true that Native American politicalleaders, who in most cases had no means to compel anyone to do anythingthey had not agreed to do, were famous for their rhetorical powers. Evenhardened European generals pursuing genocidal campaigns againstindigenous peoples often reported themselves reduced to tears by theirpowers of eloquence. Still, persuasiveness need not take the form of logicalargumentation; it can just as easily involve appeal to sentiment, whippingup passions, deploying poetic metaphors, appealing to myth or proverbialwisdom, employing irony and indirection, humour, insult, or appeals toprophecy or revelation; and the degree to which one privileges any of thesehas everything to do with the rhetorical tradition to which the speakerbelongs, and the presumed dispositions of their audience.
It was largely the speakers of Iroquoian languages such as the Wendat, orthe ﬁve Haudenosaunee nations to their south, who appear to have placedsuch weight on reasoned debate – even ﬁnding it a form of pleasurableentertainment in own right. This fact alone had major historicalrepercussions. Because it appears to have been exactly this form of debate –rational, sceptical, empirical, conversational in tone – which before longcame to be identiﬁed with the European Enlightenment as well. And, justlike the Jesuits, Enlightenment thinkers and democratic revolutionaries saw it as intrinsically connected with the rejection of arbitrary authority,particularly that which had long been assumed by the clergy. 
Let’s gather together the strands of our argument so far.
By the mid seventeenth century, legal and political thinkers in Europewere beginning to toy with the idea of an egalitarian State of Nature; atleast in the minimal sense of a default state that might be shared bysocieties which they saw as lacking government, writing, religion, privateproperty or other signiﬁcant means of distinguishing themselves from oneanother. Terms like ‘equality’ and ‘inequality’ were just beginning to comeinto common usage in intellectual circles – around the time, indeed, that theﬁrst French missionaries set out to evangelize the inhabitants of what arenow Nova Scotia and Quebec.27 Europe’s reading public was growingincreasingly curious about what such primordial societies might have beenlike. But they had no particular disposition to imagine men and womenliving in a State of Nature as especially ‘noble’, let alone as rationalsceptics and champions of individual liberty.28 This latter perspective wasthe product of a dialogic encounter.
As we’ve seen, at ﬁrst neither side – not the colonists of New France, northeir indigenous interlocutors – had much to say about ‘equality’. Rather,the argument was about liberty and mutual aid, or what might even be bettercalled freedom and communism. We should be clear about what we mean by the latter term. Since the early nineteenth century, there have been livelydebates about whether there was ever a thing that might legitimately bereferred to as ‘primitive communism’. At the centre of these debates, almostinvariably, were the indigenous societies of the Northeast Woodlands – eversince Friedrich Engels used the Iroquois as a prime example of primitivecommunism in his The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State(1884). Here, ‘communism’ always refers to communal ownership,particularly of productive resources. As we’ve already observed, manyAmerican societies could be considered somewhat ambiguous in this sense:women owned and worked the ﬁelds individually, even though they storedand disposed of the products collectively; men owned their own tools andweapons individually, even if they typically shared out the game and spoils.
However, there’s another way to use the word ‘communism’: not as aproperty regime but in the original sense of ‘from each according to theirabilities, to each according to their needs’. There’s also a certain minimal, ‘baseline’ communism which applies in all societies; a feeling that ifanother person’s needs are great enough (say, they are drowning), and thecost of meeting them is modest enough (say, they are asking for you tothrow them a rope), then of course any decent person would comply.Baseline communism of this sort could even be considered the very groundsof human sociability, since it is only one’s bitter enemies who would not betreated this way. What varies is just how far it is felt such baselinecommunism should properly extend.
In many societies – and American societies of that time appear to havebeen among them – it would have been quite inconceivable to refuse arequest for food. For seventeenth-century Frenchmen in North America,this was clearly not the case: their range of baseline communism appears tohave been quite restricted, and did not extend to food and shelter –something which scandalized Americans. But just as we earlier witnessed aconfrontation between two very different concepts of equality, here we areultimately witnessing a clash between very different concepts ofindividualism. Europeans were constantly squabbling for advantage;societies of the Northeast Woodlands, by contrast, guaranteed one anotherthe means to an autonomous life – or at least ensured no man or woman was subordinated to any other. Insofar as we can speak of communism, itexisted not in opposition to but in support of individual freedom.
The same could be said of indigenous political systems that Europeansencountered across much of the Great Lakes region. Everything operated toensure that no one’s will would be subjugated to that of anyone else. It wasonly over time, as Americans learned more about Europe, and Europeansbegan to consider what it would mean to translate American ideals ofindividual liberty into their own societies, that the term ‘equality’ began togain ground as a feature of the discourse between them. 
IN WHICH WE INTRODUCE THE WENDAT PHILOSOPHER.STATESMAN KANDIARONK, AND EXPLAIN HOW HIS VIEWSON HUMAN NATURE AND SOCIETY TOOK ON NEW LIFE IN THE SALONS OF ENLIGHTENMENT EUROPE (INCLUDING ANASIDE ON THE CONCEPT OF ‘SCHISMOGENESIS’) 
In order to understand how the indigenous critique – that consistent moraland intellectual assault on European society, widely voiced by Native American observers from the seventeenth century onwards – evolved, andits full impact on European thinking, we ﬁrst need to understand somethingabout the role of two men: an impoverished French aristocrat named Louis-Armand de Lom d’Arce, Baron de la Hontan, and an unusually brilliantWendat statesman named Kandiaronk. 
In 1683, Lahontan (as he came to be known), then seventeen years old,joined the French army and was posted to Canada. Over the course of thenext decade he took part in a number of campaigns and exploratoryexpeditions, eventually attaining the rank of deputy to the Governor-General, the Comte de Frontenac. In the process he became ﬂuent in bothAlgonkian and Wendat, and – by his own account at least – good friendswith a number of indigenous political ﬁgures. Lahontan later claimed that,because he was something of a sceptic in religious matters and a politicalenemy of the Jesuits, these ﬁgures were willing to share with him theiractual opinions about Christian teachings. One of them was Kandiaronk.
A key strategist of the Wendat Confederacy, a coalition of fourIroquoian-speaking peoples, Kandiaronk (his name literally meant ‘themuskrat’ and the French often referred to him simply as ‘Le Rat’) was atthat time engaged in a complex geopolitical game, trying to play theEnglish, French and Five Nations of the Haudenosaunee off against eachother, with the initial aim of averting a disastrous Haudenosaunee assault onthe Wendat, but with the long-term goal of creating a comprehensiveindigenous alliance to hold off the settler advance.29 Everyone who methim, friend or foe, admitted he was a truly remarkable individual: acourageous warrior, brilliant orator and unusually skilful politician. He wasalso, to the very end of his life, a staunch opponent of Christianity.30 

Lahontan’s own career came to a bad end. Despite having successfullydefended Nova Scotia against an English ﬂeet, he ran foul of its governorand was forced to ﬂee French territory. Convicted in absentia ofinsubordination, he spent most of the next decade in exile, wandering aboutEurope trying, unsuccessfully, to negotiate a return to his native France. By1702, Lahontan was living in Amsterdam and very much down on his luck,described by those who met him as penniless vagrant and freelance spy. Allthat was to change when he published a series of books about hisadventures in Canada. 
Two were memoirs of his American adventures. The third, entitled
Curious Dialogues with a Savage of Good Sense Who Has Travelled 
(1703), comprised a series of four conversations between Lahontan andKandiaronk, in which the Wendat sage – voicing opinions based on his ownethnographic observations of Montreal, New York and Paris – casts anextremely critical eye on European mores and ideas about religion, politics,health and sexual life. These books won a wide audience, and before longLahontan had become something of a minor celebrity. He settled at thecourt of Hanover, which was also the home base for Leibniz, whobefriended and supported him before Lahontan fell ill and died, around1715. 
Most criticism of Lahontan’s work simply assumes as a matter of coursethat the dialogues are made up, and that the arguments attributed to‘Adario’ (the name given there to Kandiaronk) are the opinions of Lahontanhimself.31 In a way, this conclusion is unsurprising. Adario claims not onlyto have visited France, but expresses opinions on everything from monasticpolitics to legal affairs. In the debate on religion, he often sounds like anadvocate of the deist position that spiritual truth should be sought in reason,not revelation, embracing just the sort of rational scepticism that wasbecoming popular in Europe’s more daring intellectual circles at the time. Itis also true that the style of Lahontan’s dialogues seems partly inspired bythe ancient Greek writings of the satirist Lucian; and also that, given theprevalence of Church censorship in France at the time, the easiest way for afreethinker to get away with publishing an open attack on Christianityprobably would have been to compose a dialogue pretending to defend thefaith from the attacks of an imaginary foreign sceptic – and then make sureone loses all the arguments.
In recent decades, however, indigenous scholars returned to the materialin light of what we know about Kandiaronk himself – and came to verydifferent conclusions.32 The real-life Adario was famous not only for hiseloquence, but was known for engaging in debates with Europeans of justthe sort recorded in Lahontan’s book. As Barbara Alice Mann remarks,despite the almost unanimous chorus of Western scholars insisting thedialogues are imaginary, ‘there is excellent reason for accepting them asgenuine.’ First, there are the ﬁrst-hand accounts of Kandiaronk’s oratoricalskills and dazzling wit. Father Pierre de Charlevoix described Kandiaronkas so ‘naturally eloquent’ that ‘no one perhaps ever exceeded him in mentalcapacity.’ An exceptional council speaker, ‘he was not less brilliant inconversation in private, and [councilmen and negotiators] often took pleasure in provoking him to hear his repartees, always animated, full ofwit, and generally unanswerable. He was the only man in Canada who wasa match for the [governor] Count de Frontenac, who often invited him to histable to give his ofﬁcers this pleasure.’33 

During the 1690s, in other words, the Montreal-based governor and hisofﬁcers (presumably including his sometime deputy, Lahontan) hosted aproto-Enlightenment salon, where they invited Kandiaronk to debateexactly the sort of matters that appeared in the Dialogues, and in which itwas Kandiaronk who took the position of rational sceptic.
What’s more, there is every reason to believe that Kandiaronk actuallyhad been to France; that’s to say, we know the Wendat Confederation didsend an ambassador to visit the court of Louis XIV in 1691, andKandiaronk’s ofﬁce at the time was Speaker of the Council, which wouldhave made him the logical person to send. While the intimate knowledge ofEuropean affairs and understanding of European psychology attributed toAdario might seem implausible, Kandiaronk was a man who had beenengaged in political negotiations with Europeans for years, and regularlyran circles around them by anticipating their logic, interests, blind spots andreactions. Finally, many of the critiques of Christianity, and European waysmore generally, attributed to Adario correspond almost exactly to criticismsthat are documented from other speakers of Iroquoian languages around thesame time.34 

Lahontan himself claimed to have based the Dialogues on notes jotteddown during or after a variety of conversations he’d had with Kandiaronk atMichilimackinac, on the strait between Lakes Huron and Michigan; notesthat he later reorganized with the governor’s help and which weresupplemented, no doubt, by reminiscences both had of similar debates heldover Frontenac’s own dinner table. In the process the text was no doubtaugmented and embellished, and probably tweaked again when Lahontanproduced his ﬁnal edition in Amsterdam. There is, however, every reason tobelieve the basic arguments were Kandiaronk’s own.
Lahontan anticipates some of these arguments in his Memoirs, when henotes that Americans who had actually been to Europe – here, he was verylikely thinking primarily of Kandiaronk himself, as well as a number offormer captives who had been put to work as galley slaves – came backcontemptuous of European claims to cultural superiority. Those NativeAmericans who had been in France, he wrote, … were continually teasing us with the faults and disorders theyobserved in our towns, as being occasioned by money. There’s nopoint in trying to remonstrate with them about how useful thedistinction of property is for the support of society: they make a jokeof anything you say on that account. In short, they neither quarrelnor ﬁght, nor slander one another; they scoff at arts and sciences,and laugh at the difference of ranks which is observed with us. Theybrand us for slaves, and call us miserable souls, whose life is notworth having, alleging that we degrade ourselves in subjectingourselves to one man [the king] who possesses all the power, and isbound by no law but his own will. 
In other words, we ﬁnd here all the familiar criticisms of European societythat the earliest missionaries had to contend with – the squabbling, the lackof mutual aid, the blind submission to authority – but with a new elementadded in: the organization of private property. Lahontan continues: ‘Theythink it unaccountable that one man should have more than another, and thatthe rich should have more respect than the poor. In short, they say, the nameof savages, which we bestow upon them, would ﬁt ourselves better, sincethere is nothing in our actions that bears an appearance of wisdom.’
Native Americans who had the opportunity to observe French societyfrom up close had come to realize one key difference from their own, onewhich may not otherwise have been apparent. Whereas in their ownsocieties there was no obvious way to convert wealth into power overothers (with the consequence that differences of wealth had little effect onindividual freedom), in France the situation could not have been moredifferent. Power over possessions could be directly translated into powerover other human beings.
But here let us give the ﬂoor to Kandiaronk himself. The ﬁrst of theDialogues is about religious matters, in which Lahontan allows his foilcalmly to pick apart the logical contradictions and incoherence of theChristian doctrines of original sin and redemption, paying particularattention to the concept of hell. As well as casting doubt on the historicityof scripture, Kandiaronk continually emphasizes the fact that Christians aredivided into endless sects, each convinced they are entirely right and that allthe others are hell-bound. To give a sense of its ﬂavour: Kandiaronk: Come on, my brother. Don’t get up in arms … It’sonly natural for Christians to have faith in the holy scriptures, since,from their infancy, they’ve heard so much of them. Still, it isnothing if not reasonable for those born without such prejudice, suchas the Wendats, to examine matters more closely.
However, having thought long and hard over the course of adecade about what the Jesuits have told us of the life and death of the son of the Great Spirit, any Wendat could give you twentyreasons against the notion. For myself, I’ve always held that, if itwere possible that God had lowered his standards sufﬁciently tocome down to earth, he would have done it in full view of everyone,descending in triumph, with pomp and majesty, and most publicly… He would have gone from nation to nation performing mightymiracles, thus giving everyone the same laws. Then we would allhave had exactly the same religion, uniformly spread and equallyknown throughout the four corners of the world, proving to ourdescendants, from then till ten thousand years into the future, thetruth of this religion. Instead, there are ﬁve or six hundred religions,each distinct from the other, of which according to you, the religionof the French, alone, is any good, sainted, or true.35 

The last passage reﬂects perhaps Kandiaronk’s most telling point: theextraordinary self-importance of the Jesuit conviction that an all-knowingand all-powerful being would freely choose to entrap himself in ﬂesh andundergo terrible suffering, all for the sake of a single species, designed to beimperfect, only some of which were going to be rescued from damnation anyway.36 

There follows a chapter on the subject of law, where Kandiaronk takesthe position that European-style punitive law, like the religious doctrine ofeternal damnation, is not necessitated by any inherent corruption of humannature, but rather by a form of social organization that encourages selﬁshand acquisitive behaviour. Lahontan objects: true, reason is the same for allhumans, but the very existence of judges and punishment shows that noteveryone is capable of following its dictates: 
Lahontan: This is why the wicked need to be punished, and thegood need to be rewarded. Otherwise, murder, robbery and 
defamation would spread everywhere, and, in a word, we wouldbecome the most miserable people upon the face of the earth. 
Kandiaronk: For my own part, I ﬁnd it hard to see how you couldbe much more miserable than you already are. What kind of human,what species of creature, must Europeans be, that they have to beforced to do good, and only refrain from evil because of fear ofpunishment? …
You have observed that we lack judges. What is the reason forthat? Well, we never bring lawsuits against one another. And why dowe never bring lawsuits? Well, because we made a decision neitherto accept or make use of money. And why do we refuse to allowmoney into our communities? The reason is this: we are determinednot to have laws – because, since the world was a world, ourancestors have been able to live contentedly without them. 
Given that the Wendat most certainly did have a legal code, this might seemdisingenuous on Kandiaronk’s part. By laws, however, he is clearlyreferring to laws of a coercive or punitive nature. He goes on to dissect thefailings of the French legal system, dwelling particularly on judicialpersecution, false testimony, torture, witchcraft accusations and differentialjustice for rich and poor. In conclusion, he swings back to his originalobservation: the whole apparatus of trying to force people to behave wellwould be unnecessary if France did not also maintain a contrary apparatusthat encourages people to behave badly. That apparatus consisted of money,property rights and the resultant pursuit of material self-interest: 
Kandiaronk: I have spent six years reﬂecting on the state ofEuropean society and I still can’t think of a single way they actthat’s not inhuman, and I genuinely think this can only be the case,as long as you stick to your distinctions of ‘mine’ and ‘thine’. Iafﬁrm that what you call money is the devil of devils; the tyrant ofthe French, the source of all evils; the bane of souls andslaughterhouse of the living. To imagine one can live in the countryof money and preserve one’s soul is like imagining one couldpreserve one’s life at the bottom of a lake. Money is the father ofluxury, lasciviousness, intrigues, trickery, lies, betrayal, insincerity, – of all the world’s worst behaviour. Fathers sell their children,husbands their wives, wives betray their husbands, brothers kill eachother, friends are false, and all because of money. In the light of allthis, tell me that we Wendat are not right in refusing to touch, or somuch as to look at silver? 
For Europeans in 1703, this was heady stuff.
Much of the subsequent exchange consists of the Frenchman trying toconvince Kandiaronk of the advantages of adopting European civilization,and Kandiaronk countering that the French would do much better to adoptthe Wendat way of life. Do you seriously imagine, he says, that I would behappy to live like one of the inhabitants of Paris, to take two hours everymorning just to put on my shirt and make-up, to bow and scrape beforeevery obnoxious galoot I meet on the street who happened to have beenborn with an inheritance? Do you really imagine I could carry a purse fullof coins and not immediately hand them over to people who are hungry;that I would carry a sword but not immediately draw it on the ﬁrst band ofthugs I see rounding up the destitute to press them into naval service? If, onthe other hand, Lahontan were to adopt an American way of life,Kandiaronk tells him, it might take a while to adjust – but in the end he’d befar happier. (Kandiaronk had a point, as we’ve seen in the last chapter;settlers adopted into indigenous societies almost never wanted to go back.)
Kandiaronk is even willing to propose that Europe would be better off ifits whole social system was dismantled: 
Lahontan: Try for once in your life to actually listen. Can’t you see,my dear friend, that the nations of Europe could not survive withoutgold and silver – or some similar precious symbol. Without it,nobles, priests, merchants and any number of others who lack thestrength to work the soil would simply die of hunger. Our kingswould not be kings; what soldiers would we have? Who would workfor kings, or anybody else? … It would plunge Europe into chaosand create the most dismal confusion imaginable. 
Kandiaronk: You honestly think you’re going to sway me byappealing to the needs of nobles, merchants and priests? If youabandoned conceptions of mine and thine, yes, such distinctions 
between men would dissolve; a levelling equality would then takeits place among you as it now does among the Wendat. And yes, forthe ﬁrst thirty years after the banishing of self-interest, no doubt youwould indeed see a certain desolation as those who are onlyqualiﬁed to eat, drink, sleep and take pleasure would languish anddie. But their progeny would be ﬁt for our way of living. Over andover I have set forth the qualities that we Wendat believe ought todeﬁne humanity – wisdom, reason, equity, etc. – and demonstratedthat the existence of separate material interests knocks all these onthe head. A man motivated by interest cannot be a man of reason. 
Here, ﬁnally, ‘equality’ is invoked as a self-conscious ideal – but only as theresult of a prolonged confrontation between American and Europeaninstitutions and values, and as a calculated provocation, turning Europeancivilizing discourse backwards on itself. 
One reason why modern commentators have found it so easy to dismissKandiaronk as the ultimate ‘noble savage’ (and, therefore, as a mereprojection of European fantasies) is because many of his assertions are soobviously exaggerated. It’s not really true that the Wendat, or otherAmerican societies, had no laws, never quarrelled and knew no inequalitiesof wealth. At the same time, as we’ve seen, Kandiaronk’s basic line ofargument is perfectly consistent with what French missionaries and settlersin North America had been hearing from other indigenous Americans. Toargue that because the Dialogues romanticize, they can’t really reﬂect whathe said, is to assume that people are incapable of romanticizing themselves
– despite the fact that this is what any skilful debater is likely to do undersuch circumstances, and all sources concur that Kandiaronk was perhaps themost skilful they’d ever met.
Back in the 1930s, the anthropologist Gregory Bateson coined the term‘schismogenesis’ to describe people’s tendency to deﬁne themselves againstone another.37 Imagine two people getting into an argument about someminor political disagreement but, after an hour, ending up taking positionsso intransigent that they ﬁnd themselves on completely opposite sides ofsome ideological divide – even taking extreme positions they would neverembrace under ordinary circumstances, just to show how much theycompletely reject the other’s points. They start out as moderate social democrats of slightly different ﬂavours; before a few heated hours are over,one has somehow become a Leninist, the other an advocate of the ideas ofMilton Friedman. We know this kind of thing can happen in arguments.Bateson suggested such processes can become institutionalized on a culturallevel as well. How, he asked, do boys and girls in Papua New Guinea cometo behave so differently, despite the fact that no one ever explicitly instructsthem about how boys and girls are supposed to behave? It’s not just byimitating their elders; it’s also because boys and girls each learn to ﬁnd thebehaviour of the opposite sex distasteful and try to be as little like them aspossible. What start as minor learned differences become exaggerated untilwomen come to think of themselves as, and then increasingly actuallybecome, everything that men are not. And, of course, men do the samething towards women.
Bateson was interested in psychological processes within societies, butthere’s every reason to believe something similar happens between societies as well. People come to deﬁne themselves against their neighbours.Urbanites thus become more urbane, as barbarians become more barbarous.If ‘national character’ can really be said to exist, it can only be as a result ofsuch schismogenetic processes: English people trying to become as little aspossible like French, French people as little like Germans, and so on. Ifnothing else, they will all deﬁnitely exaggerate their differences in arguingwith one another. 
In a historical confrontation of civilizations like that taking place alongthe east coast of North America in the seventeenth century, we can expect tosee two contradictory processes. On the one hand, it is only to be expectedthat people on both sides of the divide will learn from one another andadopt each other’s ideas, habits and technologies (Americans began usingEuropean muskets; European settlers began to adopt more indulgentAmerican approaches to disciplining children). At the same time, they willalso almost invariably do the opposite, picking out certain points of contrastand exaggerating or idealizing them – eventually even trying to act, in somerespects, as little like their new neighbours as possible.
Kandiaronk’s focus on money is typical of such situations. To this day,indigenous societies incorporated into the global economy, from Bolivia toTaiwan, almost invariably frame their own traditions, as Marshall Sahlinsputs it, by opposition to the white man’s ‘living in the way of money’.38 

All these would be rather trivial concerns had Lahontan’s books not been so successful; but they were to have an enormous impact on Europeansensibilities. Kandiaronk’s opinions were translated into German, English,Dutch and Italian, and continued in print, in multiple editions, for over acentury. Any self-respecting intellectual of the eighteenth century wouldhave been almost certain to have read them. They also inspired a ﬂood ofimitations. By 1721, Parisian theatregoers were ﬂocking to Delisle de laDrevetière’s comedy L’Arlequin sauvage: the story of a Wendat brought toFrance by a young sea captain, featuring a long series of indignantmonologues in which the hero ‘attributes the ills of [French] society toprivate property, to money, and in particular to the monstrous inequalitywhich makes the poor the slaves of the rich’.39 The play was revivedalmost yearly for the next two decades.40 

Even more strikingly, just about every major French Enlightenmentﬁgure tried their hand at a Lahontan-style critique of their own society, fromthe perspective of some imagined outsider. Montesquieu chose a Persian;the Marquis d’Argens a Chinese; Diderot a Tahitian; Chateaubriand aNatchez; Voltaire’s L’Ingénu was half Wendat and half French.41 All took up and developed themes and arguments borrowed directly fromKandiaronk, supplemented by lines from other ‘savage critics’ in travellers’ accounts.42 Indeed, a strong case can be made for the real origins of the‘Western gaze’ – that rational, supposedly objective way of looking atstrange and exotic cultures which came to characterize later Europeananthropology – lying not in travellers’ accounts, but rather in Europeanaccounts of precisely these imaginary sceptical natives: gazing inwards,brows furrowed, at the exotic curiosities of Europe itself.
Perhaps the single most popular work of this genre, published in 1747, was Letters of a Peruvian Woman by the prominent saloniste Madame de Grafﬁgny, which viewed French society through the eyes of an imaginarykidnapped Inca princess. The book is considered a feminist landmark, inthat it may well be the ﬁrst European novel about a woman which does notend with the protagonist either marrying or dying. Grafﬁgny’s Inca heroine,Zilia, is as critical of the vanities and absurdities of European society as sheis of patriarchy. By the nineteenth century, the novel was remembered insome quarters as the ﬁrst work to introduce the notion of state socialism tothe general public, Zilia wondering why the French king, despite levying all 
sorts of heavy taxes, cannot simply redistribute the wealth in the samemanner as the Sapa Inca.43 

In 1751, preparing a second edition of her book, Madame de Grafﬁgnysent letters to a variety of friends asking for suggested changes. One ofthese correspondents was a twenty-three-year-old seminary student andbudding economist, A. R. J. Turgot, and we happen to have a copy of hisreply – which was long and highly (if constructively) critical. Turgot’s textcould hardly be more important, since it marks a key moment in his ownintellectual development: the point where he began to turn his most lastingcontribution to human thought – the idea of material economic progress –into a general theory of history. 
IN WHICH WE EXPLAIN THE DEMIURGIC POWERS OF A. R. J. TURGOT, AND HOW HE TURNED THE INDIGENOUSCRITIQUE OF EUROPEAN CIVILIZATION ON ITS HEAD,LAYING THE BASIS FOR MOST MODERN VIEWS OF SOCIAL EVOLUTION (OR: HOW AN ARGUMENT ABOUT ‘FREEDOM’BECAME ONE ABOUT ‘EQUALITY’) 
The Inca Empire could hardly be described as ‘egalitarian’ – indeed, it wasan empire – but Madame de Grafﬁgny represented it as a benevolentdespotism; one in which all are ultimately equal before the king. Zilia’scritique of France, like that of all imaginary outsiders writing in thetradition of Kandiaronk, focuses on the lack of individual freedom inFrench society and its violent inequalities.44 But Turgot found such thinking disturbing, even dangerous.
Yes, Turgot acknowledged, ‘we all love the idea of freedom and equality’
– in principle. But we must consider a larger context. In reality, he ventured,the freedom and equality of savages is not a sign of their superiority; it’s asign of inferiority, since it is only possible in a society where eachhousehold is largely self-sufﬁcient and, therefore, where everyone isequally poor. As societies evolve, Turgot reasoned, technology advances.Natural differences in talents and capacities between individuals (whichhave always existed) become more signiﬁcant, and eventually they form thebasis for an ever more complex division of labour. We progress from simplesocieties like those of the Wendat to our own complex ‘commercialcivilization’, in which the poverty and dispossession of some – however lamentable it may be – is nonetheless the necessary condition for theprosperity of society as a whole.
There is no avoiding such inequality, concluded Turgot in his reply toMadame de Grafﬁgny. The only alternative, according to him, would bemassive, Inca-style state intervention to create a uniformity of socialconditions: an enforced equality which could only have the effect ofcrushing all initiative and, therefore, result in economic and socialcatastrophe. In light of all this, Turgot suggested Madame de Grafﬁgnyrewrite her novel in such a way as to have Zilia realize these terribleimplications at the end of the book.
Unsurprisingly, Grafﬁgny ignored his advice.
A few years later, Turgot would elaborate these same ideas in a series oflectures on world history. He had already been arguing – for some years –for the primacy of technological progress as a driver for overall socialimprovement. In these lectures, he developed this argument into an explicittheory of stages of economic development: social evolution, he reasoned,always begins with hunters, then moves on to a stage of pastoralism, thenfarming, and only then ﬁnally passes to the contemporary stage of urbancommercial civilization.45 Those who still remain hunters, shepherds orsimple farmers are best understood as vestiges of our own previous stagesof social development.
In this way, theories of social evolution – now so familiar that we rarelydwell on their origins – ﬁrst came to be articulated in Europe: as a directresponse to the power of indigenous critique. Within a few years, Turgot’sbreakdown of all societies into four stages was appearing in the lectures ofhis friend and intellectual ally Adam Smith in Glasgow, and was workedinto a general theory of human history by Smith’s colleagues: men likeLord Kames, Adam Ferguson and John Millar. The new paradigm soonbegan to have a profound effect on how indigenous people were imaginedby European thinkers, and by the European public more generally.
Observers who had previously considered the modes of subsistence anddivision of labour in North American societies to be trivial matters, or of atbest secondary importance, now began assuming that they were the onlything that really mattered. Everyone was to be sorted along the same grandevolutionary ladder, depending on their primary mode of acquiring food.‘Egalitarian’ societies were banished to the bottom of this ladder, where atbest they could provide some insight on how our distant ancestors might have lived; but certainly could no longer be imagined as equal parties to adialogue about how the inhabitants of wealthy and powerful societiesshould conduct themselves in the present. 
Let’s pause for a moment to take stock. In the years between 1703 and1751, as we’ve seen, the indigenous American critique of European societyhad an enormous impact on European thought. What began as widespreadexpressions of outrage and distaste by Americans (when ﬁrst exposed toEuropean mores) eventually evolved, through a thousand conversations,conducted in dozens of languages from Portuguese to Russian, into anargument about the nature of authority, decency, social responsibility and,above all, freedom. As it became clear to French observers that mostindigenous Americans saw individual autonomy and freedom of action asconsummate values – organizing their own lives in such a way as tominimize any possibility of one human being becoming subordinated to thewill of another, and hence viewing French society as essentially one offractious slaves – they reacted in a variety of different ways.
Some, like the Jesuits, condemned the principle of freedom outright.Others – settlers, intellectuals and members of the reading public backhome – came to see it as a provocative and appealing social proposition.(Their conclusions on this matter, incidentally, bore no particular relation totheir feelings about indigenous populations themselves, whom they wereoften happy to see exterminated – though, in fairness, there were publicﬁgures on both sides of the intellectual divide who strongly opposedaggression against foreign peoples.) In fact, the indigenous critique ofEuropean institutions was seen as so powerful that anyone objecting toexisting intellectual and social arrangements would tend to deploy it as aweapon of choice: a game, as we’ve seen, played by pretty much every oneof the great Enlightenment philosophers.
In the process – and we’ve seen how this was already happening withLahontan and Kandiaronk – an argument about freedom also became,increasingly, an argument about equality. Above all, though, all theseappeals to the wisdom of ‘savages’ were still ways of challenging thearrogance of received authority: that medieval certainty which maintainedthat the judgments of the Church and the establishment it upheld, havingembraced the correct version of Christianity, were necessarily superior tothose of anyone else on earth. 
Turgot’s case reveals just how much those particular notions ofcivilization, evolution and progress – which we’ve come to think of as thevery core of Enlightenment thought – are, in fact, relative latecomers to thatcritical tradition. Most importantly, it shows how the development of thesenotions came in direct response to the power of the indigenous critique.Indeed, it was to take an enormous effort to salvage that very sense ofEuropean superiority which Enlightenment thinkers had aimed to upend,unsettle and de-centre. Certainly, over the next century and more, such ideasbecame a remarkably successful strategy for doing so. But they also createda welter of contradictions: for instance, the peculiar fact that Europeancolonial empires, unlike almost any other in history, were forced to espousetheir own ephemerality, claiming to be mere temporary vehicles to speed uptheir subjects’ march to civilization – at least those subjects who, unlike theWendat, they hadn’t largely wiped off the map.
At this point we ﬁnd ourselves back full circle with Rousseau. 
HOW JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU, HAVING WON ONEPRESTIGIOUS ESSAY COMPETITION, THEN LOST ANOTHER(COMING IN OVER THE PERMITTED WORD LENGTH), BUTFINALLY WENT ON TO CONQUER THE WHOLE OF HUMANHISTORY 
The exchange between Madame de Grafﬁgny and Turgot gives us a senseof intellectual debate in France in the early 1750s; at least, in the saloniste circles with which Rousseau was familiar. Were freedom and equalityuniversal values, or were they – at least in their pure form – inconsistentwith a regime based on private property? Did the progress of arts andsciences lead to improved understanding of the world, and therefore tomoral progress as well? Or was the indigenous critique correct, and thewealth and power of France simply a perverse side effect of unnatural, evenpathological, social arrangements? These were the questions on everydebater’s lips at the time.
If we know anything about those debates today, it’s largely because oftheir inﬂuence on Rousseau’s essay. The Discourse on the Origins of SocialInequality has been taught, debated and picked apart in a thousandclassrooms – which is odd, because in many ways it is very much aneccentric outlier, even by the standards of its time. 
In the early part of his life, Rousseau was known mainly as an aspiringcomposer. His rise to prominence as a social thinker began in 1750, whenhe took part in a contest sponsored by the same learned society, theAcadémie de Dijon, on the question, ‘Has the restoration of the sciencesand arts contributed to moral improvement?’46 Rousseau won ﬁrst prize,and national fame, with an essay in which he argued with great passion thatthey had not. Our elementary moral intuitions, he asserted, arefundamentally decent and sound; civilization merely corrupts byencouraging us to value form over content. Almost all the examples in thisDiscourse on the Arts and Sciences are taken from classical Greek and Roman sources – but in his footnotes, Rousseau hints at other sources ofinspiration: 
I don’t dare speak of those happy nations who do not know even the
names of the vices which we have such trouble controlling, of those
American savages whose simple and natural ways of keeping public
order Montaigne does not hesitate to prefer, not merely to the laws
of Plato, but even to anything more perfect which philosophy will
ever be able to dream up for governing a people. He cites a number
of striking examples of these for those who understand how to
admire them. What’s more, he says, they don’t wear breeches!47 

Rousseau’s victory sparked something of a scandal. It was consideredcontroversial, to say the least, for an academy dedicated to the advancementof the arts and sciences to award top honours to an argument stating that thearts and sciences were entirely counterproductive. As for Rousseau, hespent much of the next several years writing well-publicized responses tocriticisms of the piece (as well as using his new fame to produce a comic opera, The Village Soothsayer, which became popular at the French court).When in 1754 the Académie de Dijon announced a new contest on theorigins of social inequality, they clearly felt they had to put the upstart in hisplace.
Rousseau took the bait. He submitted an even more elaborate treatise,clearly designed to shock and confound. Not only did it fail to win the prize(which was bestowed on a very conventional essay by a representative ofthe religious establishment named the Abbé Talbert, who attributed ourcurrent unequal condition largely to original sin), but the judges announced that, since Rousseau’s submission went far over the word limit, they had noteven read it all the way through.
Rousseau’s essay is undoubtedly odd. It’s also not exactly what it’s oftenclaimed to be. Rousseau does not, in fact, argue that human society beginsin a state of idyllic innocence. He argues, rather confusingly, that the ﬁrsthumans were essentially good, but nonetheless systematically avoided oneanother for fear of violence. As a result, human beings in a State of Naturewere solitary creatures, which allows him to make a case that ‘society’ itself
– that is, any form of ongoing association between individuals – wasnecessarily a restraint on human freedom. Even language marked acompromise. But the real innovation Rousseau introduces comes at the keymoment of humanity’s ‘fall from grace’, a moment triggered, he argues, bythe emergence of property relations.
Rousseau’s model of human society – which, he repeatedly emphasizes,is not meant to be taken literally, but is simply a thought experiment –involves three stages: a purely imaginary State of Nature, when individualslived in isolation from one another; a stage of Stone Age savagery, whichfollowed the invention of language (in which he includes most of themodern inhabitants of North America and other actually observable‘savages’); then ﬁnally, civilization, which followed the invention ofagriculture and metallurgy. Each marks a moral decline. But, as Rousseau iscareful to emphasize, the entire parable is a way to understand what made itpossible for human beings to accept the notion of private property in theﬁrst place: 
The ﬁrst man who, having enclosed a piece of land, thought ofsaying, ‘This is mine’, and found people simple enough to believehim, was the real founder of civil society. How many crimes, warsand murders, how much misery and horror the human race wouldhave been spared if someone had pulled up the stakes and ﬁlled inthe ditch and cried out to his fellow men: ‘Beware of listening tothis impostor. You are lost if you forget that the fruits of the earthbelong to everyone, and that the earth itself belongs to no one!’ Butit is highly probable that by this time things had reached a pointbeyond which they could not go on as they were; for the idea ofproperty, depending on many prior ideas which could only have arisen in successive stages, was not formed all at once in the human
mind.48 

Here, Rousseau asks exactly the same question that puzzled so manyindigenous Americans. How is it that Europeans are able to turn wealth intopower; turn a mere unequal distribution of material goods – which exists, atleast to some degree, in any society – into the ability to tell others what todo, to employ them as servants, workmen or grenadiers, or simply to feelthat it was no concern of theirs if they were left dying in a feverish bundleon the street? 
While Rousseau does not cite Lahontan or the Jesuit Relations directly, he was clearly familiar with them,49 as any intellectual of the time wouldhave been, and his work is informed by the same critical questions: why areEuropeans so competitive? Why do they not share food? Why do theysubmit themselves to other people’s orders? Rousseau’s long excursus onpitié – the natural sympathy that, he argues, savages have for one anotherand the quality that holds off the worst depredations of civilization in itssecond phase – only makes sense in light of the constant indigenousexclamations of dismay to be found in those books: that Europeans justdon’t seem to care about each other; that they are ‘neither generous norkind’.50 

The reason for the essay’s astonishing success, then, is that for all itssensationalist style, it’s really a kind of clever compromise between two orperhaps even three contradictory positions on the most urgent social andmoral concerns of eighteenth-century Europe. It manages to incorporateelements of the indigenous critique, echoes of the biblical narrative of theFall, and something that at least looks a great deal like the evolutionarystages of material development that were only just being propounded,around that time, by Turgot and Scottish Enlightenment thinkers. Rousseauagrees, in essence, with Kandiaronk’s view that civilized Europeans were,by and large, atrocious creatures, for all the reasons that the Wendat hadoutlined; and he agrees that property is the root of the problem. The one –major – difference between them is that Rousseau, unlike Kandiaronk,cannot really envisage society being based on anything else.
In translating the indigenous critique into terms that French philosopherscould understand, this sense of possibility is precisely what was lost. ToAmericans like Kandiaronk, there was no contradiction between individual liberty and communism – that’s to say, communism in the sense we’ve beenusing it here, as a certain presumption of sharing, that people who aren’tactual enemies can be expected to respond to one another’s needs. In theAmerican view, the freedom of the individual was assumed to be premisedon a certain level of ‘baseline communism’, since, after all, people who arestarving or lack adequate clothes or shelter in a snowstorm are not reallyfree to do much of anything, other than whatever it takes to stay alive.
The European conception of individual freedom was, by contrast, tiedineluctably to notions of private property. Legally, this association tracesback above all to the power of the male household head in ancient Rome,who could do whatever he liked with his chattels and possessions, includinghis children and slaves.51 In this view, freedom was always deﬁned – atleast potentially – as something exercised to the cost of others. What’smore, there was a strong emphasis in ancient Roman (and modernEuropean) law on the self-sufﬁciency of households; hence, true freedommeant autonomy in the radical sense, not just autonomy of the will, butbeing in no way dependent on other human beings (except those underone’s direct control). Rousseau, who always insisted he wished to livewithout being dependent on others’ help (even as he had all his needsattended to by mistresses and servants), played out this very same logic inthe conduct of his own life.52 

When our ancestors, Rousseau wrote, made the fatal decision to dividethe earth into individually owned plots, creating legal structures to protecttheir property, then governments to enforce those laws, they imagined theywere creating the means to preserve their liberty. In fact, they ‘ran headlongto their chains’. This is a powerful image, but it is unclear what Rousseaufelt this lost liberty would actually have looked like; especially if, as heinsisted, any ongoing human relationship, even one of mutual aid, is itself arestraint on liberty. It’s hardly surprising that he ends up inventing a purelyimaginary age in which each individual wandered alone among the trees;more surprising, perhaps, that his imaginary world has come so often todeﬁne the arc of our own horizons. How did this happen? 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE INDIGENOUS CRITIQUE, THE MYTH OF PROGRESS AND THEBIRTH OF THE LEFT 
As we’ve mentioned before, in the wake of the French Revolutionconservative critics blamed Rousseau for almost everything. Many held himpersonally responsible for the guillotine. The dream of restoring the ancientstate of liberty and equality, they argued, led to exactly the effects Turgothad predicted: an Inca-style totalitarianism that could only be enforcedthrough revolutionary terror.
It is true that political radicals at the time of the American and FrenchRevolutions embraced Rousseau’s ideas. Here, for example, is an extractpurportedly from a manifesto written in 1776 which almost perfectlyreproduces Rousseau’s fusion of evolutionism and critique of privateproperty as leading directly to the origins of the state: 
As families multiplied, the means of subsistence began to fail; thenomad (or roaming) life ceased, and PROPERTY started intoexistence; men chose habitations; agriculture made them intermix.Language became universal; living together, one man began tomeasure his strength with another, and the weaker weredistinguished from the stronger. This undoubtedly created the ideaof mutual defence, of one individual governing diverse familiesreunited, and of thus defending their persons and their ﬁelds againstthe invasion of an enemy; but hence LIBERTY was ruined in itsfoundation, and EQUALITY disappeared.53 

These words are drawn from the purported manifesto of the Secret Order ofthe Illuminati, a network of revolutionary cadres organized within theFreemasons by a Bavarian law professor named Adam Weishaupt. Theorganization did exist in the late eighteenth century; its purpose wasapparently to educate an enlightened international, or even anti-national,elite to work for the restoration of freedom and equality.
Conservatives almost immediately denounced the Order, leading to itbeing banned in 1785, less than ten years after its foundation, but right-wing conspiracists insisted it continued to exist, and that the Illuminati werethe hidden hands pulling the strings behind the French Revolution (or latereven the Russian). This is silly, but one reason the fantasy was possible isthat the Illuminati were perhaps the ﬁrst to propose that a revolutionaryvanguard, trained in the correct interpretation of doctrine, would be able to 
understand the overall direction of human history – and, therefore, becapable of intervening to speed up its progress.54 

It may seem ironic that Rousseau, who began his career by taking what wewould now consider an arch-conservative position – that seeming progressleads only to moral decay – would end up becoming the supreme bête noireof so many conservatives.55 But a special vitriol is always reserved fortraitors. 
Many conservative thinkers see Rousseau as having gone full circle froma promising start to creating what we now think of as the political left. Norare they entirely wrong in this. Rousseau was indeed a crucial ﬁgure in theformation of left-wing thought. One reason intellectual debates of the mideighteenth century seem so strange to us nowadays is precisely that whatwe understand as left/right divisions had not yet crystallized. At the time ofthe American Revolution, the terms ‘left’ and ‘right’ themselves did not yetexist. A product of the decade immediately following, they originallyreferred to the respective seating positions of aristocratic and popularfactions in the French National Assembly of 1789.
Let us emphasize (we really shouldn’t have to) that Rousseau’s effusionson the fundamental decency of human nature and lost ages of freedom andequality were in no sense themselves responsible for the French Revolution.It’s not as if he somehow caused the sans culottes to rise up by putting suchideas into their heads (as we’ve noted, for most of European historyintellectuals seem to have been the only class of people who weren’t capable of imagining that other worlds might be brought into being). Butwe can argue that, in folding together the indigenous critique and thedoctrine of progress originally developed to counter it, Rousseau did in factwrite the founding document of the left as an intellectual project.
For the same reason, right-wing thought has from the beginning beensuspicious not just about ideas of progress, but also the entire tradition thatemerged from the indigenous critique. Today, we assume that it is largelythose on the political left who speak about the ‘myth of the noble savage’,and that any early European account that idealizes faraway people, or evenattributes to them cogent opinions, is really just a romantic projection ofEuropean fantasies on to people the authors could never genuinelyunderstand. The racist denigration of the savage, and naive celebration ofsavage innocence, are always treated as two sides of the same imperialist coin.56 Yet originally this was an explicitly right-wing position, asexplained by Ter Ellingson, the contemporary anthropologist who hasreviewed the subject most comprehensively. Ellingson concluded therenever was a ‘noble savage’ myth; at least not in the sense of a stereotype ofsimple societies living in an age of happy primordial innocence. Rather,travellers’ accounts tend to supply a much more ambivalent picture,describing alien societies as a complicated, sometimes (to them) incoherent,mix of virtues and vices. What needs to be investigated, instead, mightbetter be called the ‘myth of the myth of the noble savage’: why is it thatcertain Europeans began attributing such a naive position to others? Theanswer isn’t pretty. The phrase ‘noble savage’ was in fact popularized acentury or so after Rousseau, as a term of ridicule and abuse. It wasdeployed by a clique of outright racists, who in 1859 – as the BritishEmpire reached its height of power – took over the British EthnologicalSociety and called for the extermination of inferior peoples.
The original exponents of the idea blamed Rousseau, but before longstudents of literary history were scouring the archives looking for traces ofthe ‘noble savage’ everywhere. Almost all the texts discussed in thischapter came under scrutiny; all were dismissed as dangerous, romanticfantasies. At ﬁrst, however, these dismissals came from the political right.Ellingson makes a particular example of Gilbert Chinard, whose 1913volume L’Amérique et le rêve exotique dans la littérature française auXVIIe et au XVIIIe siècle (America and the Exotic Dream in French Literature of the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries) was primarilyresponsible for establishing the notion of the ‘noble savage’ as a Westernliterary trope in American universities, since he was perhaps the least shyabout his political agenda.
Citing Lahontan as the key ﬁgure in the formation of this notion, Chinardargued that Rousseau borrowed speciﬁc arguments either from Lahontan’sMemoirs or his Dialogues with Kandiaronk. In a broader sense, he detectsan afﬁnity of temperament: 
It is Jean-Jacques [Rousseau], more than any other author, that the
author of the Dialogues with a Savage resembles. With all his faults,
his fundamentally ignoble motives, he has put into his style a
passion, an enthusiasm which has no equivalent except in the
Discourse on Inequality. Like Rousseau, he is an anarchist; like him, he is bereft of moral sensibility, and to a considerably greater
degree; like him, he imagines himself to be the prey of persecutions
of the human race leagued against himself; like him, he is indignant
about the sufferings of the miserable and, even more than him, he
throws out the call to arms; and like him, above all, he attributes to
property all the evils that we suffer. In this, he permits us to
establish a direct connection between the Jesuit missionaries and 
Jean-Jacques.57 

According to Chinard, even the Jesuits (Lahontan’s ostensible enemies)were ultimately playing the same game of introducing deeply subversivenotions through the back door. Their motives in quoting the exasperatedobservations of their interlocutors were not innocent. Commenting directlyon the above passage, Ellingson quite reasonably asks what on earthChinard is actually talking about here: some kind of anarchist movementperpetrated by Lahontan, the Jesuits and Rousseau? A conspiracy theory toexplain the French Revolution? Yes, concludes Ellingson, it almost is. TheJesuits, according to Chinard, have promoted ‘dangerous ideas’ in giving usthe impression of the good qualities of ‘savages’, and ‘this impressionseems to have been contrary to the interests of the monarchical state andreligion.’ In fact, Chinard’s fundamental characterization of Rousseau is as‘un continuateur des missionaires Jésuites’, and he holds the missionariesresponsible for giving rise to ‘the revolutionary spirits [who] wouldtransform our society and, inﬂamed by reading their relations, bring us backto the state of the American savages’.58 

For Chinard, whether or not European observers were reporting the viewsof their indigenous interlocutors accurately is irrelevant. For indigenousAmericans were, as Chinard puts it, ‘a race different from our own’ withwhom no meaningful relation was possible: one might as well, he implies,record the political opinions of a leprechaun.59 What really matters, heemphasizes, are the motives of the white people involved – and thesepeople were clearly malcontents and troublemakers. He accuses one earlyobserver on the customs of the Greenland Inuit of inserting a mix ofsocialism and ‘illuminism’ into his descriptions – that is, viewing savagecustoms through a lens that might as well have been borrowed from theSecret Order of the Illuminati.60 

BEYOND THE ‘MYTH OF THE STUPID SAVAGE’ (WHY ALLTHESE THINGS MATTER SO MUCH FOR OUR PROJECT IN THIS BOOK) 
This is not the place to document how a right-wing critique morphed into aleft-wing critique. To some degree, one can probably just put it down to thelaziness of scholars schooled in the history of French or English literature,faced with the prospect of having to seriously engage with what aseventeenth-century Mi’kmaq might have actually been thinking. To sayMi’kmaq thought is unimportant would be racist; to say it’s unknowablebecause the sources were racist, however, does rather let one off the hook.
To some degree, too, such reluctance to engage with indigenous sourcesis based on completely legitimate protests on the part of those who have,historically, been romanticized. Many have remarked that, to those on thereceiving end, being told you are an inferior breed and that thereforeanything you say can be ignored, and being told you are an innocent childof nature or the embodiment of ancient wisdom, and that thereforeeverything you say must be treated as ineffably profound are almost equallyannoying. Both attitudes appear designed to prevent any meaningfulconversation. 
As we noted in our ﬁrst chapter, when we set out to write this book weimagined ourselves making a contribution to the burgeoning literature onthe origins of social inequality – except this time, one based on the actualevidence. As our research proceeded, we came to realize just how strange aquestion ‘what are the origins of social inequality?’ really was. Quite apartfrom the implications of primordial innocence, this way of framing theproblem suggests a certain diagnosis of what is wrong with society, andwhat can and can’t be done about it; and as we’ve seen, it often has verylittle to do with what people living in those societies we’ve come to call‘egalitarian’ actually feel makes them different from others.
Rousseau sidestepped the question by reducing his savages to merethought experiments. He was just about the only major ﬁgure of the FrenchEnlightenment who didn’t write a dialogue or other imaginative workattempting to look at European society from a foreign point of view. In fact,he strips his ‘savages’ of any imaginative powers of their own; theirhappiness is entirely derived from their inability to imagine thingsotherwise, or to project themselves into the future in any way at all.61 They are thus also utterly lacking in philosophy. This is presumably why no onecould foresee the disasters that would ensue when they ﬁrst staked outproperty and began to form governments to protect it; by the time humanbeings were even capable of thinking that far ahead, the worst damage hadalready been done.
Back in the 1960s, the French anthropologist Pierre Clastres suggestedthat precisely the opposite was the case. What if the sort of people we liketo imagine as simple and innocent are free of rulers, governments,bureaucracies, ruling classes and the like, not because they are lacking inimagination, but because they’re actually more imaginative than we are?We ﬁnd it difﬁcult to picture what a truly free society would be like;perhaps they have no similar trouble picturing what arbitrary power anddomination would be like. Perhaps they can not only imagine it, butconsciously arrange their society in such a way as to avoid it. As we’ll seein the next chapter, Clastres’s argument has its limits. But by insisting thatthe people studied by anthropologists are just as self-conscious, just asimaginative, as the anthropologists themselves, he did more to reverse thedamage than anyone before or since.
Rousseau has been accused of many crimes. He is innocent of most ofthem. If there is really a toxic element in his legacy, it is this: not hispromulgation of the image of the ‘noble savage’, which he didn’t really do,but his promulgation of what we might call the ‘myth of the stupid savage’
– even if one he considered blissful in its state of stupidity. Nineteenth-century imperialists adopted the stereotype enthusiastically, merely addingon a variety of ostensibly scientiﬁc justiﬁcations – from Darwinianevolutionism to ‘scientiﬁc’ racism – to elaborate on that notion of innocent simplicity, and thus provide a pretext for pushing the remaining freepeoples of the world (or increasingly, as European imperial expansioncontinued, the formerly free peoples) into a conceptual space where theirjudgements no longer seemed threatening. This is the work we are trying toundo. 
‘Liberty, Equality, Fraternity’ was the rallying cry of the FrenchRevolution.62 Today there are whole disciplines – sub-branches ofphilosophy and political science and legal studies – which take ‘equality’ astheir principal subject matter. Everyone agrees that equality is a value; no one seems to agree on what the term actually refers to. Equality ofopportunity? Equality of condition? Formal equality before the law?
Similarly, societies like the seventeenth-century Mi’kmaq, Algonkians orWendat are regularly referred to as ‘egalitarian societies’; or, if not, then as‘band’ or ‘tribal’ societies, which is usually presumed to mean the samething. It’s never entirely clear exactly what the term is supposed to refer to.Are we talking about an ideology, the belief that everyone in society should be the same – obviously not in all ways, but in certain respects that areconsidered particularly important? Or should it be one in which peopleactually are the same? What might either of these actually mean inpractice? That all members of society have equal access to land, or treateach other with equal dignity, or are equally free to make their opinionsknown in public assemblies; or are we talking about some scale ofmeasurement that can be imposed by the observer: cash income, politicalpower, calorie intake, house size, number and quality of personalpossessions?
Would equality mean the effacement of the individual, or the celebrationof the individual? (After all, to an outside observer, a society whereeveryone was exactly the same, and one where they were all so completelydifferent as to preclude any sort of comparison, would seem equally‘egalitarian’.) Can one speak of equality in a society where elders aretreated like gods and make all important decisions, if everyone in thatsociety who survives past, say, ﬁfty will eventually become an elder? Whatabout gender relations? Many societies referred to as ‘egalitarian’ are onlyreally egalitarian between adult men. Sometimes relations between men andwomen in such societies are anything but equal. At other times things aremore ambiguous.
It may be, for instance, that men and women in a given society are notonly expected to perform different sorts of work, but hold different opinionsabout why work (or what sorts of work) is important in the ﬁrst place, andtherefore feel they have a higher status; or perhaps that their respectiveroles are so different, it makes no sense to compare them. Many of thesocieties encountered by the French in North America ﬁt this description.They could be seen as matriarchal from one perspective, patriarchal fromanother.63 In such cases, can we speak of gender equality? Or would weonly be able to do so if men and women were also equal according to someminimal external criterion: being equally free from the threat of domestic violence, for example, or having equal access to resources, or equal say incommunal affairs? 
Since there is no clear and generally accepted answer to any of thesequestions, use of the term ‘egalitarian’ has led to endless arguments. In fact,it remains entirely unclear what ‘egalitarian’ even means. Ultimately theidea is employed not because it has any real analytical substance, but ratherfor the same reason seventeenth-century natural law theorists speculatedabout equality in the State of Nature: ‘equality’ is a default term, referringto that kind of protoplasmic mass of humanity one imagines as being leftover when all the trappings of civilization are stripped away. ‘Egalitarian’people are those without princes, judges, overseers or hereditary priests, andusually without cities or writing, or preferably even farming. They aresocieties of equals only in the sense that all the most obvious tokens ofinequality are missing.
It follows that any historical work which purports to be about the originsof social inequality is really an inquiry into the origins of civilization; onewhich in turn implies a vision of history like that of Turgot, whichconceives ‘civilization’ as a system of social complexity, guaranteeinggreater overall prosperity, but at the same time ensuring that certaincompromises will necessarily have to be made in the areas of freedom andequality. We will be trying to write a different kind of history, which willalso require a different understanding of ‘civilization’.
To be clear, it’s not that we consider the fact that princes, judges,overseers or hereditary priests – or for that matter, writing, cities andfarming – only emerge at a certain point in human history to beuninteresting or insigniﬁcant. Quite on the contrary: in order to understandour current predicament as a species, it is absolutely crucial to understandhow these things ﬁrst came about. However, we would also insist that, inorder to do so, we should reject the impulse to treat our distant ancestors assome sort of primordial human soup. Evidence accumulating fromarchaeology, anthropology and related ﬁelds suggests that – just likeseventeenth-century Amerindians and Frenchmen – the people ofprehistoric times had very speciﬁc ideas about what was important in theirsocieties; that these varied considerably; and that describing such societiesas uniformly ‘egalitarian’ tells us almost nothing about them.
No doubt there was usually a degree of equality by default; anassumption that humans are all equally powerless in the face of the gods; or a strong feeling that no one’s will should be permanently subordinated toanother’s. Presumably there must have been, if only to ensure thatpermanent princes, judges, overseers or hereditary priests did not emergefor such long periods of time. But self-conscious ideas of ‘equality’, puttingequality forward as an explicit value (as opposed to an ideology of freedom,or dignity, or participation that applies equally to all) appear to have beenrelative latecomers to human history. And even when they do appear, theyrarely apply to everyone.
Ancient Athenian democracy, to take just one example, was based onpolitical equality among its citizens – even if these were only somewherebetween 10 and 20 per cent of the overall population – in the sense thateach had the same rights to participate in public decision-making. We aretaught to see this notion of equal civic participation as a milestone inpolitical development, revived and expanded some 2,000 years later (as ithappens, the political systems labelled ‘democracies’ in nineteenth-centuryEurope had almost nothing to do with ancient Athens, but this is not reallythe point). What’s more to the point is that Athenian intellectuals at thetime, who were mostly of aristocratic background, tended to consider thewhole arrangement a tawdry business, and most of them much preferred thegovernment of Sparta, ruled by an even smaller percentage of the totalpopulation, who lived collectively off the labours of serfs.
Spartan citizens, in turn, referred to themselves as the Homoioi, whichcould be translated either as ‘the Equals’ or ‘Those Who Are All the Same’
– they all underwent the same rigorous military training, adopted the samehaughty disdain for both effeminate luxuries and individual idiosyncrasies,ate in communal mess halls and spent most of their lives practising for war. 
This is not, then, a book about the origins of inequality. But it aims toanswer many of the same questions in a different way. There is no doubtthat something has gone terribly wrong with the world. A very smallpercentage of its population do control the fates of almost everyone else,and they are doing it in an increasingly disastrous fashion. To understandhow this situation came about, we should trace the problem back to whatﬁrst made possible the emergence of kings, priests, overseers and judges.But we no longer have the luxury of assuming we already know in advancewhat the precise answers will turn out to be. Taking guidance from indigenous critics like Kandiaronk, we need to approach the evidence of thehuman past with fresh eyes. 

3 

Unfreezing the Ice Age 
In and out of chains: the protean possibilities of human politics 
Most societies imagine a mythic age of creation. Once upon a time, thestory goes, the world was different: ﬁsh and birds could talk, animals couldturn into humans and humans into animals. It was possible, in such a time,for things to come into being that were entirely new, in a way that cannotreally happen any more: ﬁre, or cooking, or the institution of marriage, orthe keeping of pets. In these lesser days, we are reduced to endlesslyrepeating the great gestures of that time: lighting our own particular ﬁres,arranging our own particular marriages, feeding our particular pets –without ever being able to change the world in quite the same way.
In some ways, accounts of ‘human origins’ play a similar role for ustoday as myth did for ancient Greeks or Polynesians, or the Dreamtime forindigenous Australians. This is not to cast aspersions on the scientiﬁc rigouror value of these accounts. It is simply to observe that the two fulﬁlsomewhat similar functions. If we think on a scale of, say, the last 3 millionyears, there actually was an age in which the lines between (what we todaythink of as) human and animal were still indistinct; and when someone,after all, did have to light a ﬁre, cook a meal or perform a marriageceremony for the ﬁrst time. We know these things happened. Still, we reallydon’t know how. It is very difﬁcult to resist the temptation to make upstories about what might have happened: stories which necessarily reﬂectour own fears, desires, obsessions and concerns. As a result, such distanttimes can become a vast canvas for the working out of our collectivefantasies. 
This canvas of human prehistory is distinctively modern. The renownedtheorist of culture W. J. T. Mitchell once remarked that dinosaurs are the quintessential modernist animal, since in Shakespeare’s time no one knewsuch creatures had ever existed. In a similar way, until quite recently mostChristians assumed anything worth knowing about early humans could befound in the Book of Genesis. Up until the early years of the nineteenthcentury, ‘men of letters’ – scientists included – still largely assumed that theuniverse did not even exist prior to late October, 4004 BC, and that allhumans spoke the same language (Hebrew) until the dispersal of humanity,after the fall of the Tower of Babel sixteen centuries later.1 

At that time there was as yet no ‘prehistory’. There was only history,even if some of that history was wildly wrong. The term ‘prehistory’ onlycame into common use after the discoveries at Brixham Cave in Devon in 1858, when stone axes, which could only have been fashioned by humans,were found alongside remains of cave bear, woolly rhinoceros and otherextinct species, all together under a sealed casing of rock. This, andsubsequent archaeological ﬁndings, sparked a complete rethinking ofexisting evidence. Suddenly, ‘the bottom dropped out of human history.’2 

The problem is that prehistory turns out to be an extremely long period oftime: more than 3 million years, during which we know our ancestors were,at least sometimes, using stone tools. For most of this period, evidence isextremely limited. There are phases of literally thousands of years forwhich the only evidence of hominin activity we possess is a single tooth,and perhaps a handful of pieces of shaped ﬂint. While the technology weare capable of bringing to bear on such remote periods improvesdramatically each decade, there’s only so much you can do with sparsematerial. As a result, it’s difﬁcult to resist the temptation to ﬁll in the gaps,to claim we know more than we really do. When scientists do this theresults often bear a suspicious resemblance to those very biblical narrativesmodern science is supposed to have cast aside.
Let’s take just one example. Back in the 1980s, there was a great deal ofbuzz about a ‘mitochondrial Eve’, the putative common ancestor of ourentire species. Granted, no one was claiming to have actually found thephysical remains of such an ancestor; but sequencing the DNA inmitochondria – the tiny cell-motors we inherit from our mothers –demonstrated that such an Eve must have existed, perhaps as recently as120,000 years ago. And while no one imagined we’d ever ﬁnd Eve herself,the discovery of a variety of other fossil skulls rescued from the EastAfrican Rift Valley (a natural ‘preservation trap’ for Palaeolithic remains, long since swept to oblivion in more exposed settings) seemed to provide asuggestion as to what Eve might have looked like and where she might havelived. While scientists continued debating the ins and outs, popularmagazines were soon carrying stories about a modern counterpart to theGarden of Eden, the original incubator of humanity, the savannah-wombthat gave life to us all.
Many of us probably still have something resembling this picture ofhuman origins in our mind. More recent research, though, has shown itcouldn’t possibly be accurate. In fact, biological anthropologists andgeneticists are now converging on an entirely different picture. Rather thaneveryone starting out the same, then dispersing from East Africa in someTower-of-Babel moment to become the diverse nations and peoples of theearth, early human populations in Africa appear to have been far morephysically diverse than anything we are familiar with today.
We modern-day humans tend to exaggerate our differences. The resultsof such exaggeration are often catastrophic. Between war, slavery,imperialism and sheer day-to-day racist oppression, the last severalcenturies have seen so much human suffering justiﬁed by minor differencesin human appearance that we can easily forget just how minor thesedifferences really are. By any biologically meaningful standard, livinghumans are barely distinguishable. Whether you go to Bosnia, Japan,Rwanda or the Bafﬁn Islands, you can expect to see people with the samesmall and gracile faces, chin, globular skull and roughly the samedistribution of body hair. Not only do we look the same, in many ways weact the same as well (for instance, everywhere from the Australian outbackto Amazonia, rolling one’s eyes is a way of saying ‘what an idiot!’). Thesame applies to cognition. We might think different groups of humansrealize their cognitive capacities in very different ways – and to someextent, of course, we do – but again, much of this perceived differenceresults from our having no real basis for comparison: there’s no humanlanguage, for instance, that doesn’t have nouns, verbs and adjectives; andwhile humans may enjoy very different forms of music and dance, there’sno known human population that does not enjoy music and dancing at all.
Rewind a few hundred millennia and all this was most deﬁnitely not the case. 
For most of our evolutionary history, we did indeed live in Africa – butnot just the eastern savannahs, as previously thought: our biological ancestors were distributed everywhere from Morocco to the Cape.3 Some of those populations remained isolated from each another for tens or evenhundreds of thousands of years, cut off from their nearest relatives bydeserts and rainforests. Strong regional traits developed.4 The result probably would have struck a modern observer as something more akin to aworld inhabited by hobbits, giants and elves than anything we have directexperience of today, or in the more recent past. Those elements that makeup modern humans – the relatively uniform ‘us’ referred to above – seemonly to have come together quite late in the process. In other words, if wethink humans are different from each other now, it’s largely illusory; andeven such differences as do exist are utterly trivial and cosmetic, comparedwith what must have been happening in Africa during most of prehistory.
Ancestral humans were not only quite different from each other; theyalso coexisted with smaller-brained, more ape-like species such as Homo naledi. What were these ancestral societies like? At this point, at least, weshould be honest and admit that, for the most part, we don’t have theslightest idea. There’s only so much you can reconstruct from cranialremains and the occasional piece of knapped ﬂint – which is basically allwe have. Most of the time we don’t even really know what was going onbelow the neck, let alone with pigmentation, diet or anything else. What wedo know is that we are composite products of this original mosaic of humanpopulations, which interacted with one another, interbred, drifted apart andcame together mostly in ways we can still only guess at.5 It seems reasonable to assume that behaviours like mating and child-rearingpractices, the presence or absence of dominance hierarchies or forms oflanguage and proto-language must have varied at least as much as physicaltypes, and probably far more.
Perhaps the only thing we can say with real certainty is that, in terms ofancestry, we are all Africans.
Modern humans ﬁrst appeared in Africa. When they began expanding outof Africa into Eurasia, they encountered other populations such asNeanderthals and Denisovans – less different, but still different – and thesevarious groups interbred.6 Only after those other populations becameextinct can we really begin talking about a single, human ‘us’ inhabiting theplanet. What all this brings home is just how radically different the socialand even physical world of our remote ancestors would have seemed to us –and this would have been true at least down to around 40,000 BC. The range of ﬂora and fauna surrounding them was quite unlike anything that existstoday. All of which makes it extremely difﬁcult to draw analogies. There’ssimply nothing in the historical or ethnographic record that resembles asituation in which different subspecies of human interbred, interacted, co.operated, but sometimes also killed each other – and even if there were, thearchaeological evidence is too thin and sporadic to test whether remoteprehistory was really anything like that or not.7 

The only thing we can reasonably infer about social organization amongour earliest ancestors is that it’s likely to have been extraordinarily diverse.Early humans inhabited a wide range of natural environments, fromcoastlands and tropical forest to mountains and savannah. They were far, farmore physically diverse than humans are today; and presumably their socialdifferences were even greater than their physical ones. In other words, thereis no ‘original’ form of human society. Searching for one can only be amatter of myth-making, whether the resultant myths take the form of ‘killerape’ fantasies that emerged in the 1960s, seared into collectiveconsciousness by movies like Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey; orthe ‘aquatic ape’; or even the highly amusing but fanciful ‘stoned ape’ (thetheory that consciousness emerged from the accidental ingestion ofpsychedelic mushrooms). Myths like these entertain YouTube watchers tothis day.
We should be clear: there’s nothing wrong with myths. Likely as not, thetendency to make up stories about the distant past as a way of reﬂecting onthe nature of our species is itself, like art and poetry, one of those distinctlyhuman traits that began to crystallize in deep prehistory. And no doubt someof these stories – for instance, feminist theories that see distinctly humansociability as originating in collective child-rearing practices – can indeedtell us something important about the paths that converged in modernhumanity.8 But such insights can only ever be partial because there was noGarden of Eden, and a single Eve never existed. 
WHY THE ‘SAPIENT PARADOX’ IS A RED HERRING; AS SOON
AS WE WERE HUMAN, WE STARTED DOING HUMAN THINGS 
Human beings, today, are a fairly uniform species. This uniformity is not, inevolutionary terms, particularly old. Its genetic basis was establishedaround half a million years ago, but it is almost certainly misguided to think we could ever specify a single, more recent point in time when Homo sapiens ‘emerged’ – that is, when all the various elements of the modernhuman condition converged, deﬁnitively, in some stupendous moment ofcreation. 
Consider the ﬁrst direct evidence of what we’d now call complexsymbolic human behaviour, or simply ‘culture’. Currently, it dates back nomore than 100,000 years. Where exactly on the African continent thisevidence for culture crops up is determined largely by conditions ofpreservation, and by the countries that have so far been most accessible forarchaeological investigation. Rock shelters around the coastlands of SouthAfrica are a key source, trapping prehistoric sediments that yield evidenceof hafted tools and the expressive use of shell and ochre around 80,000 BC.9 Comparably ancient ﬁnds are also known from other parts of Africa,but it’s not until later, around 45,000 years ago – by which time our specieswas busily colonizing Eurasia – that similar evidence starts appearing muchmore widely, and in greater quantities.
In the 1980s and 1990s it was widely assumed that something profoundhappened, some kind of sudden creative efﬂorescence, around 45,000 yearsago, variously referred to in the literature as the ‘Upper PalaeolithicRevolution’ or even the ‘Human Revolution’.10 But in the last two decades it has become increasingly clear to researchers that this is most likely anillusion, created by biases in our evidence.
Here’s why. Much of the evidence for this ‘revolution’ is restricted to asingle part of the world: Europe, where it is associated with replacement ofNeanderthals by Homo sapiens around 40,000 BC. It includes more advanced toolkits for hunting and handicrafts, the ﬁrst clear evidence forthe making of images in bone, ivory and clay – including the famoussculpted ‘female ﬁgurines’,11 dense clusters of carved and painted animalﬁgures in caves, often observed with breathtaking accuracy; more elaborateways of clothing and decorating the human body; the ﬁrst attested use ofmusical instruments like bone ﬂutes; regular exchange of raw materialsover great distances, and also what are usually taken as the earliest proofsof social inequality, in the form of grand burials.
All this is impressive, and gives the impression of a lack of synchronybetween the ticking of our genetic and cultural clocks. It seems to ask thequestion: why do so many tens of thousands of years stand between thebiological origins of humanity and the widespread appearance of typically human forms of behaviour; between when we became capable of creatingculture and when we ﬁnally got round to doing it? What were we actuallydoing in the interim? Many researchers have puzzled over this and haveeven coined a phrase for it: ‘the sapient paradox’.12 A few go so far as topostulate some late mutation in the human brain to explain the apparentlysuperior cultural capacities of Upper Palaeolithic Europeans, but such viewscan no longer be taken seriously.
In fact, it’s becoming increasingly clear that the whole problem is amirage. The reason archaeological evidence from Europe is so rich is thatEuropean governments tend to be rich; and that European professionalinstitutions, learned societies and university departments have beenpursuing prehistory far longer on their own doorstep than in other parts ofthe world. With each year that passes, new evidence accumulates for earlybehavioural complexity elsewhere: not just Africa, but also the ArabianPeninsula, Southeast Asia and the Indian subcontinent.13 Even as we write,a cave site on the coast of Kenya called Panga ya Saidi is yielding evidenceof shell beads and worked pigments stretching back 60,000 years;14 and research on the islands of Borneo and Sulawesi is opening vistas on to anunsuspected world of cave art, many thousands of years older than thefamous images of Lascaux and Altamira, on the other side of Eurasia.15 No doubt still earlier examples of complex pictorial art will one day be foundsomewhere on the continent of Africa. 
If anything, then, Europe was late to the party. Even after its initialcolonization by modern humans – starting around 45,000 BC – the continent was still thinly populated, and the new arrivals coexisted there, albeit fairlybrieﬂy, with more established Neanderthal populations (themselves engagedin complex cultural activities of various sorts).16 Why there appears to besuch a sudden cultural efﬂorescence, shortly after their arrival, may havesomething to do with climate and demography. To put it bluntly: with themovement of the ice sheets, human populations in Europe were living inharsher and more conﬁned spaces than our species had encountered before.Game-rich valleys and steppe were bounded by tundra to the north anddense coastal forests to the south. We have to picture our ancestors movingbetween relatively enclosed environments, dispersing and gathering,tracking the seasonal movements of mammoth, bison and deer herds. Whilethe absolute number of people may still have been startlingly small,17 the density of human interactions seems to have radically increased, especially 
at certain times of year. And with this came remarkable bursts of culturalexpression.18 

WHY EVEN VERY SOPHISTICATED RESEARCHERS STILL FIND WAYS TO CLING TO THE IDEA THAT SOCIAL INEQUALITY HAS AN ‘ORIGIN’ 
As we will see in a moment, the societies that resulted in whatarchaeologists call the Upper Palaeolithic period (roughly 50,000–15,000 BC) – with their ‘princely’ burials and grand communal buildings – seem tocompletely defy our image of a world made up of tiny egalitarian foragerbands. The disconnect is so profound that some archaeologists have beguntaking the opposite tack, describing Ice Age Europe as populated by‘hierarchical’ or even ‘stratiﬁed’ societies. In this, they make commoncause with evolutionary psychologists who insist that dominance behaviouris hardwired in our genes, so much so that the moment society goes beyondtiny bands, it must necessarily take the form of some ruling over others.
Almost everyone who isn’t a Pleistocene archaeologist – that is, who isnot forced to confront the evidence – simply ignores it and carries onexactly as they had before, writing as if hunter-gatherers can be assumed tohave lived in a state of primordial innocence. As Christopher Boehm puts it,we seem doomed to play out an endless recycling of the war between‘Hobbesian hawks and Rousseauian doves’: those who view humans as either innately hierarchical or innately egalitarian.
Boehm’s own work is revealing in this regard. An evolutionaryanthropologist and a specialist in primate studies, he argues that whilehumans do have an instinctual tendency to engage in dominance-submissivebehaviour, no doubt inherited from our simian ancestors, what makessocieties distinctively human is our ability to make the conscious decisionnot to act that way. Carefully working through ethnographic accounts ofexisting egalitarian foraging bands in Africa, South America and SoutheastAsia, Boehm identiﬁes a whole panoply of tactics collectively employed tobring would-be braggarts and bullies down to earth – ridicule, shame,shunning (and in the case of inveterate sociopaths, sometimes even outrightassassination)19 – none of which have any parallel among other primates.
For instance, while gorillas do not mock each other for beating theirchests, humans do so regularly. Even more strikingly, while the bullying behaviour might well be instinctual, counter-bullying is not: it’s a well.thought-out strategy, and forager societies who engage in it display whatBoehm calls ‘actuarial intelligence’. That’s to say, they understand whattheir society might look like if they did things differently: if, for instance,skilled hunters were not systematically belittled, or if elephant meat was not portioned out to the group by someone chosen at random (as opposed to theperson who actually killed the beast). This, he concludes, is the essence ofpolitics: the ability to reﬂect consciously on different directions one’ssociety could take, and to make explicit arguments why it should take onepath rather than another. In this sense, one could say Aristotle was rightwhen he described human beings as ‘political animals’ – since this isprecisely what other primates never do, at least not to our knowledge.
This is a brilliant and important argument – but, like so many authors,Boehm seems strangely reluctant to consider its full implications. Let’s do so now. 
If the very essence of our humanity consists of the fact that we are self-conscious political actors, and therefore capable of embracing a wide rangeof social arrangements, would that not mean human beings should actuallyhave explored a wide range of social arrangements over the greater part ofour history? In the end, confusingly, Boehm assumes that all human beingsuntil very recently chose instead to follow exactly the same arrangements –we were strictly ‘egalitarian for thousands of generations beforehierarchical societies began to appear’ – thereby casually tossing earlyhumans back into the Garden of Eden once again. Only with the beginningsof agriculture, he suggests, did we all collectively ﬂip back to hierarchy.Before 12,000 years ago, Boehm insists, humans were basically egalitarian,living in what he calls ‘societies of equals, and outside the family therewere no dominators’.20 

So, according to Boehm, for about 200,000 years political animals allchose to live just one way; then, of course, they began to rush headlong intotheir chains, and ape-like dominance patterns re-emerged. The solution tothe battle between ‘Hobbesian hawks and Rousseauian doves’ turns out to be: our genetic nature is Hobbesian, but our political history is pretty muchexactly as described by Rousseau. The result? An odd insistence that formany tens of thousands of years, nothing happened. This is an unsettlingconclusion, especially when we consider some of the actual archaeologicalevidence for the existence of ‘Palaeolithic politics’. 
IN WHICH WE OBSERVE HOW GRAND MONUMENTS,PRINCELY BURIALS AND OTHER UNEXPECTED FEATURES OF ICE AGE SOCIETIES HAVE UPENDED OUR ASSUMPTIONS OF WHAT HUNTER-GATHERERS ARE LIKE, AND CONSIDERWHAT IT MIGHT MEAN TO SAY THERE WAS ‘SOCIAL STRATIFICATION’ SOME 30,000 YEARS AGO 
Let’s start with rich hunter-gatherer burials. Examples can be found acrossmuch of western Eurasia, from the Dordogne to the Don. They includediscoveries in rock shelters and open-air settlements. Some of the earliestcome from sites like Sunghir in northern Russia and Dolní V.stonice in theMoravian basin, south of Brno, and date from between 34,000 and 26,000years ago. What we ﬁnd here are not cemeteries but isolated burials ofindividuals or small groups, their bodies often placed in striking posturesand decorated – in some cases, almost saturated – with ornaments. In thecase of Sunghir that meant many thousands of beads, laboriously workedfrom mammoth ivory and fox teeth. Originally, such beads would havedecorated clothing made of fur and animal skins. Some of the most lavishcostumes are from the conjoined burials of two boys, ﬂanked by greatlances made of straightened mammoth tusks.21 

At Dolní V.stonice, one triple burial contains two young men withelaborate headdresses, posed either side of an older man, all lying on a bedof soil stained red with ochre.22 Of similar antiquity is a group of caveburials unearthed on the coast of Liguria, near the modern border betweenItaly and France. Complete bodies of young or adult men, including oneespecially lavish interment known to archaeologists as Il Principe (‘thePrince’), were laid out in striking poses and suffused with jewellery,including beads made of marine shell and deer canines, as well as blades ofexotic ﬂint. Il Principe bears that name because he’s also buried with what looks to the modern eye like royal regalia: a ﬂint sceptre, elk antler batonsand an ornate headdress lovingly fashioned from perforated shells and deerteeth. Moving further west, to the Dordogne, we encounter a 16,000-year.old burial of a young woman, the so-called ‘Lady of Saint-Germain-de-la-Rivière’, which contains a rich assemblage of stomach and pelvicornaments made of shell and stag teeth. The teeth are taken from deerhunted in the Spanish Basque country 190 miles away.23 

Such ﬁndings have completely altered the specialist view of humansocieties in prehistory. The pendulum has swung so far away from the oldnotion of egalitarian bands that some archaeologists now argue that,thousands of years before the origins of farming, human societies werealready divided along lines of status, class and inherited power. As we’llsee, this is highly unlikely, but the evidence these archaeologists point to isreal enough: for instance, the extraordinary outlays of labour involved inmaking grave goods (10,000 work hours for the Sunghir beads alone, bysome estimates); the highly advanced and standardized methods ofproduction, possibly suggesting specialized craftspeople; or the way inwhich exotic, prestigious materials were transported from very distantlocations; and, most suggestive of all, a few cases where such wealth wasburied with children, maybe implying some kind of inherited status.24 

Another unexpected result of recent archaeological research, causingmany to revise their view of prehistoric hunter-gatherers, is the appearanceof monumental architecture. In Eurasia, the most famous examples are thestone temples of the Germu. Mountains, overlooking the Harran Plain insoutheast Turkey. In the 1990s, German archaeologists, working on theplain’s northern frontier, began uncovering extremely ancient remains at aplace known locally as Göbekli Tepe.25 What they found has since come tobe regarded as an evolutionary conundrum. The main source of puzzlementis a group of twenty megalithic enclosures, initially raised there around9000 BC, and then repeatedly modiﬁed over many centuries. Theseenclosures were established at a time when the surrounding plain was amixture of woodland and steppe, teeming with wild plant and animalspecies that colonized the Middle East as the last Ice Age was drawing to aclose. 
The enclosures at Göbekli Tepe are massive. They comprise great T-shaped pillars, some over sixteen feet high and weighing up to a ton, whichwere hewn from the site’s limestone bedrock or nearby quarries. The pillars,at least 200 in total, were raised into sockets and linked by walls of roughstone. Each is a unique work of sculpture, carved with images from theworld of dangerous carnivores and poisonous reptiles, as well as gamespecies, waterfowl and small scavengers. Animal forms project from therock in varying depths of relief: some hover coyly on the surface, othersemerge boldly into three dimensions. These often nightmarish creaturesfollow divergent orientations, some marching to the horizon, others working their way down into the earth. In places, the pillar itself becomes asort of standing body, with human-like limbs and clothing.
The creation of these remarkable buildings implies strictly co-ordinatedactivity on a really large scale, even more so if multiple enclosures wereconstructed simultaneously, according to an overall plan (a current point ofdebate).26 But the larger question remains: who made them? While groupsof humans not too far away had already begun cultivating crops at the time,to the best of our knowledge those who built Göbekli Tepe had not. Yes,they harvested and processed wild cereals and other plants in season, butthere is no compelling reason to see them as ‘proto-farmers’, or to suggestthey had any interest in orienting their livelihoods around the domesticationof crops. Indeed, there was no particular reason why they should, given theavailability of fruits, berries, nuts and edible wild fauna in their vicinity. (Infact, there are good reasons to think the builders of Göbekli Tepe weredifferent, in some quite startling ways, from nearby groups who werebeginning to take up farming, but this will have to wait for a later chapter;for the moment, we’re just interested in the monuments.)
To some, the raised location and orientation of the buildings at GöbekliTepe suggest an astronomical or chronometric function, each chain ofpillars aligned with a particular cycle of celestial movements.Archaeologists remain sceptical, pointing out that the structures may oncehave been roofed, and that their layout was subject to many alterations overtime. But what has mostly intrigued scholars of different disciplines so faris something else: the apparent proof they offer that ‘hunter-gatherersocieties had evolved institutions to support major public works, projects,and monumental constructions, and thus had a complex social hierarchyprior to their adoption of farming.’27 Again, matters are not so simple,because these two phenomena – hierarchy and the measure of time – wereclosely interwoven. 
While Göbekli Tepe is often presented as an anomaly, there is in fact a greatdeal of evidence for monumental construction of different sorts amonghunter-gatherers in earlier periods, extending back into the Ice Age.
In Europe, between 25,000 and 12,000 years ago public works werealready a feature of human habitation across an area reaching from Krakówto Kiev. Along this transect of the glacial fringe, remains of impressivecircular structures have been found that are clearly distinguishable from ordinary camp-dwellings in their scale (the largest were over thirty-nine feetin diameter), permanence, aesthetic qualities and prominent locations in thePleistocene landscape. Each was erected on a framework made ofmammoth tusks and bones, taken from many tens of these great animals,which were arranged in alternating sequences and patterns that go beyondthe merely functional to produce structures that would have looked quitestriking to our eyes, and magniﬁcent indeed to people at the time. Greatwooden enclosures of up to 130 feet in length also existed, of which onlythe post-holes and sunken ﬂoors remain.28 Göbekli Tepe too is likely to have had its wooden counterparts.
Monumentality is always to some degree a relative concept; that’s to say,a building or structure is ‘monumental’ only in comparison to otherbuildings and structures a viewer has actually experienced. Obviously, theIce Age produced nothing on the scale of the Pyramids of Giza or theRoman Colosseum – but, by the standards of their day, the kind ofstructures we’ve been describing can only have been considered publicworks, involving sophisticated design and the co-ordination of labour on animpressive scale. Research at the Russian site of Yudinovo suggests that‘mammoth houses’, as they are often called, were not in fact dwellings atall, but monuments in the strict sense: carefully planned and constructed tocommemorate the completion of a great mammoth hunt (and the solidarityof the extended hunting group), using whatever durable parts remained oncecarcasses had been processed for their meat and hides; and later coveredwith sediment to create a durable marker in the landscape.29 We are talkinghere about really staggering quantities of meat: for each structure (therewere ﬁve at Yudinovo), there was enough mammoth to feed hundreds ofpeople for around three months.30 Open-air settlements like Yudinovo,Mezhirich and Kostenki, where such mammoth monuments were erected,often became central places whose inhabitants exchanged amber, marineshells and animal pelts over impressive distances.
So what are we to make of all this evidence for stone temples, princelyburials, mammoth monuments and bustling centres of trade and craftproduction, stretching back far into the Ice Age? What are they doing there,in a Palaeolithic world where – at least on some accounts – nothing much isever supposed to have happened, and human societies can best beunderstood by analogy with troops of chimps or bonobos? Unsurprisingly,perhaps, some have responded by completely abandoning the idea of an egalitarian Golden Age, concluding instead that this must have been asociety dominated by powerful leaders, even dynasties – and, therefore, thatself-aggrandizement and coercive power have always been the enduringforces behind human social evolution. But this doesn’t really work either.
Evidence of institutional inequality in Ice Age societies, whether grandburials or monumental buildings, is sporadic. Richly costumed burialsappear centuries, and often hundreds of miles, apart. Even if we put thisdown to the patchiness of the evidence, we still have to ask why theevidence is so patchy in the ﬁrst place: after all, if any of these Ice Age‘princes’ had behaved like, say, Bronze Age (let alone Renaissance Italian)princes, we’d also be ﬁnding all the usual trappings of centralized power:fortiﬁcations, storehouses, palaces. Instead, over tens of thousands of years,we see monuments and magniﬁcent burials, but little else to indicate thegrowth of ranked societies, let alone anything remotely resembling ‘states’.To understand why the early record of human social life is patterned in thisstrange, staccato fashion we ﬁrst have to do away with some lingeringpreconceptions about ‘primitive’ mentalities. 
IN WHICH WE DISPOSE OF LINGERING ASSUMPTIONS THAT ‘PRIMITIVE’ FOLK WERE SOMEHOW INCAPABLE OF CONSCIOUS REFLECTION, AND DRAW ATTENTION TO THEHISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF ECCENTRICITY 
In the last chapter, we suggested that the really insidious element ofRousseau’s legacy is not so much the idea of the ‘noble savage’ as that ofthe ‘stupid savage’. We may have got over the overt racism of mostnineteenth-century Europeans, or at least we think we have, but it’s notunusual to ﬁnd even very sophisticated contemporary thinkers who feel it’smore appropriate to compare ‘bands’ of hunter-gatherers with chimps orbaboons than with anyone they’d ever be likely to meet. Consider thefollowing passage from the historian Yuval Noah Harari’s Sapiens: A BriefHistory of Humankind (2014). Harari starts off with a perfectly reasonableobservation: that our knowledge of early human history is extremelylimited, and social arrangements probably varied a great deal from place toplace. True, he overstates his case (he suggests we can really know nothing,even about the Ice Age), but the basic point is well taken. Then we get this: The sociopolitical world of the foragers is another area about which
we know next to nothing … scholars cannot even agree on the
basics, such as the existence of private property, nuclear families
and monogamous relationships. It’s likely that different bands had
different structures. Some may have been as hierarchical, tense and
violent as the nastiest chimpanzee group, while others were as laid-
back, peaceful and lascivious as a bunch of bonobos. 
So not only was everyone living in bands until farming came along, butthese bands were basically ape-like in character. If this seems unfair to theauthor, remember that Harari could just as easily have written ‘as tense andviolent as the nastiest biker gang’, and ‘as laid-back, peaceful andlascivious as a hippie commune’. One might have imagined the obviousthing to compare one group of human beings with would be … anothergroup of human beings. Why, then, did Harari choose chimps instead ofbikers? It’s hard to escape the impression that the main point of differenceis that bikers choose to live the way they do. Such choices imply politicalconsciousness: the ability to argue and reﬂect about the proper way to live –which is precisely, as Boehm reminds us, what apes don’t do. Yet Harari,like so many others, chooses to compare early humans with apes anyway.
In this way, the ‘sapient paradox’ returns. Not as something real, but as aside effect of the weird way we read the evidence: insisting either that forcountless millennia we had modern brains, but for some reason decided tolive like monkeys anyway; or that we had the ability to overcome oursimian instincts and organize ourselves in an endless variety of ways, butfor some equally obscure reason only ever chose one way to organizeourselves. 
Perhaps the real question here is what it means to be a ‘self-consciouspolitical actor’. Philosophers tend to deﬁne human consciousness in termsof self-awareness; neuroscientists, on the other hand, tell us we spend theoverwhelming majority of our time effectively on autopilot, working outhabitual forms of behaviour without any sort of conscious reﬂection. Whenwe are capable of self-awareness, it’s usually for very brief periods of time:the ‘window of consciousness’, during which we can hold a thought orwork out a problem, tends to be open on average for roughly seven seconds.What neuroscientists (and it must be said, most contemporary philosophers)almost never notice, however, is that the great exception to this is when we’re talking to someone else. In conversation, we can hold thoughts andreﬂect on problems sometimes for hours on end. This is of course why sooften, even if we’re trying to ﬁgure something out by ourselves, we imaginearguing with or explaining it to someone else. Human thought is inherentlydialogic. Ancient philosophers tended to be keenly aware of all this: that’swhy, whether they were in China, India or Greece, they tended to write theirbooks in the form of dialogues. Humans were only fully self-consciouswhen arguing with one another, trying to sway each other’s views, orworking out a common problem. True individual self-consciousness,meanwhile, was imagined as something that a few wise sages could perhapsachieve through long study, exercise, discipline and meditation.
What we’d now call political consciousness was always assumed to comeﬁrst. In this sense, the Western philosophical tradition has taken a ratherunusual direction over the last few centuries. Around the same time as it abandoned dialogue as its typical mode of writing, it also began imaginingthe isolated, rational, self-conscious individual not as a rare achievement,something typically accomplished – if at all – after literally years of livingisolated in a cave or monastic cell, or on top of a pillar in a desertsomewhere, but as the normal default state of human beings anywhere.
Even stranger, over the course of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuriesit was political self-consciousness that European philosophers came to seeas some kind of amazing historical achievement: as a phenomenon whichonly really became possible with the Enlightenment itself, and thesubsequent American and French Revolutions. Before that, it was assumed,people blindly followed traditions, or what they assumed to be the will ofGod. Even when peasants or popular rebels rose up to try to overthrowoppressive regimes they couldn’t admit they were doing so, but convincedthemselves they were restoring ‘ancient customs’ or acting on some kind ofdivine inspiration. To Victorian intellectuals, the notion of people self-consciously imagining a social order more to their liking and then trying tobring it into being was simply not applicable before the modern age – andmost were deeply divided as to whether it would even be a good idea intheir own time. 
All this would have come as a great surprise to Kandiaronk, theseventeenth-century Wendat philosopher-statesman whose impact onEuropean political thought we discussed in the previous chapter. Like manyNorth American peoples of his time, Kandiaronk’s Wendat nation saw their society as a confederation created by conscious agreement; agreementsopen to continual renegotiation. But by the late nineteenth and earlytwentieth centuries, many in Europe and America had reached the point ofarguing that someone like Kandiaronk could never have really existed in theﬁrst place. ‘Primitive’ folk, they argued, were not only incapable of politicalself-consciousness, they were not even capable of fully conscious thoughton the individual level – or at least conscious thought worthy of the name.That is, just as they pretended a ‘rational Western individual’ (say, a Britishtrain guard or French colonial ofﬁcial) could be assumed to be fully self-aware all the time (a clearly absurd assumption), they argued that anyoneclassiﬁed as a ‘primitive’ or ‘savage’ operated with a ‘pre-logicalmentality’, or lived in a mythological dreamworld. At best, they weremindless conformists, bound in the shackles of tradition; at worst, they wereincapable of fully conscious, critical thought of any kind.
Such theories might be considered the high-water mark of the reactionagainst the indigenous critique of European society. The argumentsattributed to ﬁgures like Kandiaronk could be written off as simpleprojections of Western ‘noble savage’ fantasies, because real savages wereassumed to live in an entirely different mental universe. Nowadays noreputable scholar would make such claims: everyone at least pays lipservice to the psychic unity of mankind. But in practice, as we’ve seen,little has changed. Scholars still write as if those living in earlier stages ofeconomic development, and especially those who are classiﬁed as‘egalitarian’, can be treated as if they were literally all the same, living insome collective group-think: if human differences show up in any form –different ‘bands’ being different from each other – it is only in the sameway that bands of great apes might differ. Political self-consciousness, orcertainly anything we’d now call visionary politics, would have beenimpossible.
And if certain hunter-gatherers turn out not to have been livingperpetually in ‘bands’ at all, but instead congregating to create grandlandscape monuments, storing large quantities of preserved food andtreating particular individuals like royalty, contemporary scholars are at bestlikely to place them in a new stage of development: they have moved up thescale from ‘simple’ to ‘complex’ hunter-gatherers, a step closer toagriculture and urban civilization. But they are still caught in the sameTurgot-like evolutionary straitjacket, their place in history deﬁned by their mode of subsistence, and their role blindly to enact some abstract law ofdevelopment which we understand but they do not; certainly, it rarelyoccurs to anyone to ask what sort of worlds they thought they were trying to create.31 

Now, admittedly, there have always been exceptions to this rule.Anthropologists who spend years talking to indigenous people in their ownlanguages, and watching them argue with one another, tend to be wellaware that even those who make their living hunting elephants or gatheringlotus buds are just as sceptical, imaginative, thoughtful and capable ofcritical analysis as those who make their living by operating tractors,managing restaurants or chairing university departments. A few, such as theearly-twentieth-century scholar Paul Radin in his 1927 book Primitive Man as Philosopher, ended up concluding that at least those he knew best –Winnebago and other Native North Americans – were actually, on average,rather more thoughtful.
Radin himself was considered something of an oddball by hiscontemporaries (he always avoided getting a proper academic job; thelegend in Chicago was that when once given a teaching fellowship there, hewas so intimidated before his ﬁrst lecture that he immediately marched outto a nearby highway and contrived to get his leg broken by a car, then spentthe rest of the term happily reading in the hospital). Perhaps notcoincidentally, what really struck him about the ‘primitive’ societies he wasmost familiar with was their tolerance of eccentricity. This, he concluded,was simply the logical extension of that same rejection of coercion that soimpressed the Jesuits in Quebec. If, he noted, a Winnebago decided thatgods or spirits did not really exist and refused to perform rituals meant toappease them, or even if he declared the collective wisdom of the elderswrong and invented his own personal cosmology (and both these things did,quite regularly, happen), such a sceptic would deﬁnitely be made fun of,while his closest friends and family might worry lest the gods punish him insome way. However, it would never occur to them to punish him, or thatanyone should try to force him into conformity – for instance, by blaminghim for a bad hunt and therefore refusing to share food with him until heagreed to perform the usual rituals.
There is every reason to believe that sceptics and non-conformists existin every human society; what varies is how others react to them.32 Radin 
was interested in the intellectual consequences, the kind of speculativesystems of thought such out-of-sync characters might create. Others havenoted the political implications. It’s often people who are just slightly oddwho become leaders; the truly odd can become spiritual ﬁgures, but, evenmore, they can and often do serve as a kind of reserve of potential talentand insight that can be called on in the event of a crisis or unprecedentedturn of affairs. Thomas Beidelman, for instance, observes that among theearly-twentieth-century Nuer – a cattle-keeping people of South Sudan,famous for their rejection of anything that resembled government – therewere politicians and village ‘bulls’ (‘operator types’ we’d now call them)who played fast and loose with the rules, but also ‘earth priests’ whomediated local disputes, and ﬁnally prophets. The politicians were oftenunconventional: for instance, it was not uncommon for the local ‘bull’actually to be a woman whose parents had declared her a man for socialpurposes; the priests were always outsiders to the region; but the prophetwas an altogether more extreme kind of ﬁgure. He might dribble, drool,maintain a vacant stare, act like an epileptic; or engage in long but pointlesstasks such as spending hours arranging shells into designs on the ground inthe bush; or long periods in the wilderness; or he may even eat excrementor ashes. Prophets, as Beidelman notes, ‘may speak in tongues, go intotrances, fast, balance on their head, wear feathers in their hair, be active bynight rather than by day, and may perch on rooftops. Some sit with tetheringpegs up their anuses.’33 Many, too, were physically deformed. Some werecross-dressers, or given to unconventional sexual practices.
In other words, these were seriously unorthodox people. The impressionone gets from the literature is that any Nuer settlement of pre-colonial timeswas likely to be complemented by a minor penumbra of what might betermed extreme individuals; ones who in our own society would likely beclassiﬁed as anything from highly eccentric or deﬁantly queer toneurodivergent or mentally ill. Normally, prophets were treated withbemused respect. They were ill; but the illness was a direct consequence ofbeing touched by God. As a result, when great calamities or unprecedentedevents occurred – a plague, a foreign invasion – it was among thispenumbra that everyone looked for a charismatic leader appropriate to theoccasion. As a result, a person who might otherwise have spent his life assomething analogous to the village idiot would suddenly be found to haveremarkable powers of foresight and persuasion; even to be capable of inspiring new social movements among the youth or co-ordinating eldersacross Nuerland to put aside their differences and mobilize around somecommon goal; even, sometimes, to propose entirely different visions ofwhat Nuer society might be like. 
WHAT CLAUDE LÉVI-STRAUSS LEARNED FROM THE NAMBIKWARA ABOUT THE ROLE OF CHIEFS, ANDSEASONAL VARIATIONS OF SOCIAL LIFE 
Claude Lévi-Strauss is one of the few mid-twentieth-centuryanthropologists to take seriously the idea that early humans were ourintellectual equals; hence his famous argument in The Savage Mind that mythological thought, rather than representing some sort of pre-logicalhaze, is better conceived as a kind of ‘neolithic science’ as sophisticated asour own, just built on different principles. Less well known – but morerelevant to the problems we are grappling with here – are some of his earlywritings on politics.
In 1944, Lévi-Strauss published an essay about politics among theNambikwara, a small population of part-time farmers, part-time foragersinhabiting a notoriously inhospitable stretch of savannah in northwest MatoGrosso, Brazil. The Nambikwara then had a reputation as extremely simplefolk, given their very rudimentary material culture. For this reason, manytreated them almost as a direct window on to the Palaeolithic. This, Lévi-Strauss pointed out, was a mistake. People like the Nambikwara live in theshadow of the modern state, trading with farmers and city people andsometimes hiring themselves out as labourers. Some might even bedescendants of runaways from cities or plantations. Still, he noted, theirways of organizing their lives could be seen as a source of insights intomore general features of the human condition, especially as these pertain topolitics.
For Lévi-Strauss, what was especially instructive about the Nambikwarawas that, for all that they were averse to competition (they had little wealthto compete over anyway), they did appoint chiefs to lead them. The verysimplicity of the resulting arrangement, he felt, might expose ‘some basicfunctions’ of political life that ‘remain hidden in more complex andelaborate systems of government’. Not only was the role of the chiefsocially and psychologically quite similar to that of a national politician or statesman in European society, he noted, it also attracted similar personalitytypes: people who ‘unlike most of their companions, enjoy prestige for itsown sake, feel a strong appeal to responsibility, and to whom the burden ofpublic affairs brings its own reward’.34 

Modern politicians play the role of wheelers and dealers, brokeringalliances or negotiating compromises between different constituencies orinterest groups. In Nambikwara society this didn’t happen much becausethere weren’t really many differences in wealth or status. However, chiefsdid play an analogous role, brokering between two entirely different socialand ethical systems, which obtained at different times of year. Allow us toexplain. In the 1940s, the Nambikwara lived in what were effectively twovery different societies. During the rainy season, they occupied hilltopvillages of several hundred people and practised horticulture; during the restof the year they dispersed into small foraging bands. Chiefs made or losttheir reputations by acting as heroic leaders during the ‘nomadicadventures’ of the dry season, during which times they typically gaveorders, resolved crises and behaved in what would at any other time beconsidered an unacceptably authoritarian manner; in the wet season, a timeof much greater ease and abundance, they relied on those reputations toattract followers to settle around them in villages, where they employedonly gentle persuasion and led by example to guide their followers in theconstruction of houses and tending of gardens. In doing so they cared forthe sick and needy, mediated disputes and never imposed anything on anyone.
How should we think about these chiefs? They were not patriarchs, Lévi-Strauss concluded; neither were they petty tyrants (even though for certainlimited periods they were allowed to act as such); and there was no sense inwhich they were invested with mystical powers. More than anything, theyresembled modern politicians operating tiny embryonic welfare states,pooling resources and doling them out to those in need. What impressedLévi-Strauss above all was their political maturity. It was the chiefs’ skill indirecting small bands of dry-season foragers, of making snap decisions incrises (crossing a river, directing a hunt) that later qualiﬁed them to play therole of mediators and diplomats in the village plaza. But in doing so theywere effectively moving back and forth, each year, between whatevolutionary anthropologists (in the tradition of Turgot) insist on thinking of as totally different stages of social development: from hunters andforagers to farmers and back again.
It was precisely this quality that made the Nambikwara chief such apeculiarly familiar political ﬁgure: the calm sophistication with which heshifted between what were in effect two different social systems, all thewhile balancing a sense of personal ambition with the common good. Thesechiefs were in every sense self-conscious political actors. And it was theirﬂexibility and adaptability that enabled them to take such a distancedperspective on whichever system obtained at any given time.
Although Lévi-Strauss went on to become the world’s most renownedanthropologist and perhaps the most famous intellectual in France, his earlyessay on Nambikwara leadership fell into almost instant obscurity. To thisday, very few outside the ﬁeld of Amazonian studies have heard of it. Onereason is that in the post-war decades, Lévi-Strauss was moving in exactlythe opposite direction to the rest of his discipline. Where he emphasizedsimilarities between the lives of hunters, horticulturalists and modernindustrial democracies, almost everyone else – and particularly everyoneinterested in foraging societies – was embracing new variations on Turgot,though with updated language and backed up by a ﬂood of hard scientiﬁcdata. Throwing away old-fashioned distinctions between ‘savagery’,‘barbarism’ and ‘civilization’, which were beginning to sound a little toocondescending, they settled on a new sequence, which ran from ‘bands’ to‘tribes’ to ‘chiefdoms’ to ‘states’. The culmination of this trend was the landmark Man the Hunter symposium, held at the University of Chicago in1966. This framed hunter-gatherer studies in terms of a new disciplinewhich its attendees proposed to call ‘behavioural ecology’, starting withrigorously quantiﬁed studies of African savannah and rainforest groups –the Kalahari San, Eastern Hadza and Mbuti Pygmies – including caloriecounts, time allocation studies and all sorts of data that simply hadn’t beenavailable to earlier researchers. 
The new studies overlapped with a sudden upswing of popular interest injust these same African societies: for instance, the famous short ﬁlms aboutthe Kalahari Bushmen by the Marshalls (an American family ofanthropologists and ﬁlm-makers), which became ﬁxtures of introductoryanthropology courses and educational television across the world, alongwith best-selling books like Colin Turnbull’s The Forest People. Before long, it was simply assumed by almost everyone that foragers represented a separate stage of social development, that they ‘live in small groups’, ‘movearound a lot’, reject any social distinctions other than those of age andgender, and resolve conﬂicts by ‘ﬁssion’ rather than arbitration orviolence.35 The fact that these African societies were, in some cases atleast, refugee populations living in places no one else wanted, or that manyforaging societies documented in the ethnographic record (who had by thistime been largely wiped out by European settler colonialism and were thusno longer available for quantitative analysis) were nothing like this, wasoccasionally acknowledged. But it was rarely treated as particularlyrelevant. The image of tiny egalitarian bands corresponded perfectly towhat those weaned on the legacy of Rousseau felt hunter-gatherers ought to have been like. Now there seemed to be hard, quantiﬁable scientiﬁc data(and also movies!) to back it up.
In this new reality, Lévi-Strauss’s Nambikwara were simply irrelevant.After all, in evolutionary terms they weren’t even really foragers, since theyonly roamed about in foraging bands for seven or eight months a year. Sothe apparent paradox that their larger village settlements were egalitarianwhile their foraging bands were anything but could be ignored, lest ittarnish this crisp new picture. The kind of political self-consciousnesswhich seemed so self-evident in Nambikwara chiefs, let alone the wildimprovisation expected of Nuer prophets, had no place in the revisedframework of human social evolution. 
IN WHICH WE RETURN TO PREHISTORY, AND CONSIDEREVIDENCE FOR BOTH ‘EXTREME INDIVIDUALS’ AND SEASONAL VARIATIONS OF SOCIAL LIFE IN THE ICE AGE AND BEYOND 
The twentieth-century Nambikwara, Winnebago or Nuer cannot provide uswith direct windows on the past. What they can do is suggest angles ofinvestigation we might not otherwise have thought to look for. Afterconsidering their social systems, it seems self-evident to ask if, in earlyhuman societies, there is evidence for seasonal variations of socialstructure; or if highly anomalous individuals were not only treated withrespect, but played important political roles in the Palaeolithic period. As itturns out, the answer in both cases is ‘yes’. In fact, the evidence isoverwhelming. 
Let’s return to those rich Upper Palaeolithic burials, so often interpretedas evidence for the emergence of ‘inequality’, or even hereditary nobility ofsome sort. For some odd reason, those who make such arguments neverseem to notice – or, if they do, to attach much signiﬁcance to the fact – thata quite remarkable number of these skeletons (indeed, a majority) bearevidence of striking physical anomalies that could only have marked themout, clearly and dramatically, from their social surroundings.36 The adolescent boys in both Sunghir and Dolní V.stonice, for instance, hadpronounced congenital deformities; the bodies in the Romito Cave inCalabria were unusually short, with at least one case of dwarﬁsm; whilethose in Grimaldi Cave were extremely tall even by our standards, and musthave seemed veritable giants to their contemporaries.
All this seems very unlikely to be a coincidence. In fact, it makes onewonder whether even those bodies, which appear from their skeletalremains to be anatomically typical, might have been equally striking insome other way; after all, an albino, for example, or an epileptic prophetgiven to dividing his time between hanging upside down and arranging andrearranging snail shells would not be identiﬁable as such from thearchaeological record. We can’t know much about the day-to-day lives ofPalaeolithic individuals buried with rich grave goods, other than that theyseem to have been as well fed and cared for as anybody else; but we can atleast suggest they were seen as the ultimate individuals, about as differentfrom their peers as it was possible to be.
What does all this really tell us about social inequality in the last IceAge? Well, ﬁrst of all it suggests we might have to shelve any prematuretalk of the emergence of hereditary elites. It seems extremely unlikely thatPalaeolithic Europe produced a stratiﬁed elite that just happened to consistlargely of hunchbacks, giants and dwarfs. Second, we don’t know howmuch the treatment of such individuals after death had to do with their treatment in life. Another important point here is that we are not dealingwith a case of some people being buried with rich grave goods and othersbeing buried with none. Rather it is a case of some people being buried withrich grave goods, and most others not being buried at all.37 The verypractice of burying bodies intact, and clothed, appears to have beenexceptional in the Upper Palaeolithic. Most corpses were treated incompletely different ways: de-ﬂeshed, broken up, curated, or even processed into jewellery and artefacts. (In general, Palaeolithic people wereclearly much more at home with human body parts than we are.)
The corpse in its complete and articulated form – and the clothed corpseeven more so – was clearly something unusual and, one would presume,inherently strange. Some important circumstantial evidence reinforces this.In many such cases, an effort was made to contain the bodies of the UpperPalaeolithic dead by covering them with heavy objects: mammoth scapulae,wooden planks, stones or tight bindings. Perhaps saturating them withclothing, weapons and ornaments was an extension of these concerns,celebrating but also containing something potentially dangerous. This toomakes sense. The ethnographic record abounds with examples ofanomalous beings – human or otherwise – treated as both exalted anddangerous; or one way in life, another in death.
Much here is speculation. There are any number of other interpretationsthat could be placed on the evidence – though the idea that these tombsmark the emergence of some sort of hereditary aristocracy seems the leastlikely of all. Those interred were extraordinary, ‘extreme’ individuals. Theway they were treated – and here we are speaking not only about theostentatious display of riches, but that their corpses were decorated,displayed and buried to begin with – marked them out as equallyextraordinary in death. Anomalous in almost every respect, such burials canhardly be interpreted as proxies for social structure among the living. Onthe other hand, they clearly have something to do with all the contemporaryevidence for music, sculpture, painting and complex architecture. What isone to make of them? 
This is where seasonality comes into the picture.
Almost all the Ice Age sites with extraordinary burials and monumentalarchitecture were created by societies that lived a little like Lévi-Strauss’sNambikwara, dispersing into foraging bands at one time of year, gatheringtogether in concentrated settlements at another. True, they didn’t gather toplant crops. Rather, the large Upper Palaeolithic sites are linked tomigrations and seasonal hunting of game herds – woolly mammoth, steppebison or reindeer – as well as cyclical ﬁsh-runs and nut harvests. This seemsto be the explanation for those hubs of activity found in eastern Europe atplaces like Dolní V.stonice, where people took advantage of an abundanceof wild resources to feast, engage in complex rituals and ambitious artistic projects, and trade minerals, marine shells and furs. In western Europe,equivalents would be the great rock shelters of the French Périgord and theCantabrian coast, with their deep records of human activity, which similarlyformed part of an annual round of seasonal congregation and dispersal.38 

Archaeology also shows that patterns of seasonal variation lie behind themonuments of Göbekli Tepe. Activities around the stone templescorrespond with periods of annual superabundance, between midsummerand autumn, when large herds of gazelle descended on to the Harran Plain.At such times, people also gathered at the site to process massive quantitiesof nuts and wild cereal grasses, making these into festive foods, whichpresumably fuelled the work of construction.39 There is some evidence to suggest that each of these great structures had a relatively short lifespan,culminating in an enormous feast, after which its walls were rapidly ﬁlled inwith leftovers and other refuse: hierarchies raised to the sky, only to beswiftly torn down again. Ongoing research is likely to complicate thispicture, but the overall pattern of seasonal congregation for festive labourseems well established. 
Such oscillating patterns of life endured long after the invention ofagriculture. To take just one example, they may be key to understanding thefamous Neolithic monuments of Salisbury Plain in England, and not justbecause the arrangements of standing stones themselves seem to function(among other things) as giant calendars. Stonehenge, framing themidsummer sunrise and the midwinter sunset, is the most famous of these.It turns out to have been the last in a long sequence of ceremonialstructures, erected over the course of centuries in timber as well as stone, aspeople converged on the plain from remote corners of the British Isles atsigniﬁcant times of year. Careful excavation shows that many of thesestructures – now plausibly interpreted as monuments to the ancestors of aNeolithic aristocracy – were dismantled just a few generations after theirconstruction.40 

Still more striking, the people who built Stonehenge were not farmers, ornot in the usual sense. They had once been; but the practice of erecting anddismantling grand monuments coincides with a period when the peoples ofBritain, having adopted the Neolithic farming economy from continentalEurope, appear to have turned their backs on at least one crucial aspect of it:abandoning the cultivation of cereals and returning, from around 3300 BC,to the collection of hazelnuts as their staple source of plant food. On the other hand, they kept hold of their domestic pigs and herds of cattle,feasting on them seasonally at nearby Durrington Walls, a prosperous townof some thousands of people – with its own Woodhenge – in winter, butlargely empty and abandoned in summer. The builders of Stonehenge seemto have been neither foragers nor herders, but something in between.41 

All this is crucial because it’s hard to imagine how giving up agriculturecould have been anything but a self-conscious decision. There is noevidence that one population displaced another, or that farmers weresomehow overwhelmed by powerful foragers who forced them to abandontheir crops. The Neolithic inhabitants of England appear to have taken themeasure of cereal-farming and collectively decided that they preferred tolive another way. How could such a decision have been made? We’ll neverknow, but Stonehenge itself provides something of a hint since it is built ofextremely large stones, some of which (the ‘bluestones’) were transportedfrom as far away as Wales, while many of the cattle and pigs consumed atDurrington Walls were laboriously herded there from other distantlocations.42 

In other words, and remarkable as it may seem, even in the thirdmillennium BC co-ordination of some sort was clearly possible across largeparts of the British Isles. If Stonehenge was a shrine to exalted founders of aruling clan – as some archaeologists now argue – it seems likely thatmembers of their lineage claimed signiﬁcant, even cosmic roles by virtue oftheir involvement in such events. On the other hand, patterns of seasonalaggregation and dispersal raise another question: if there were kings andqueens at Stonehenge, exactly what sort could they have been? After all,these would have been kings whose courts and kingdoms existed for only afew months of the year, and otherwise dispersed into small communities ofnut gatherers and stock herders. If they possessed the means to marshallabour, pile up food resources and provender armies of year-round retainers,what sort of royalty would consciously elect not to do so? 
CONCERNING ‘BUFFALO POLICE’ (IN WHICH WEREDISCOVER THE ROLE OF SEASONALITY IN HUMAN SOCIAL AND POLITICAL LIFE) 
Recall that for Lévi-Strauss, there was a clear link between seasonalvariations of social structure and a certain kind of political freedom. The fact that one structure applied in the rainy season and another in the dryallowed Nambikwara chiefs to view their own social arrangements at oneremove: to see them as not simply ‘given’, in the natural order of things, butas something at least partially open to human intervention. The case of theBritish Neolithic – with its alternating phases of dispersal and monumentalconstruction – indicates just how far such intervention could sometimes go.
Writing in the midst of the Second World War, Lévi-Strauss probablydidn’t think he was saying anything all that extraordinary. Foranthropologists in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, it was commonknowledge that societies doing a great deal of hunting, herding or foragingwere often arranged in such a ‘double morphology’ (as Lévi-Strauss’s greatpredecessor Marcel Mauss put it).43 Lévi-Strauss was simply highlightingsome of the political implications. But these implications are important.What the existence of similar seasonal patterns in the Palaeolithic suggestsis that from the very beginning, or at least as far back as we can trace suchthings, human beings were self-consciously experimenting with differentsocial possibilities. It might be useful here to look back at this forgottenanthropological literature, with which Lévi-Strauss would have beenintimately familiar, to get a sense of just how dramatic these seasonaldifferences might be.
The key text here is Marcel Mauss and Henri Beuchat’s (1903) ‘SeasonalVariations of the Eskimo’. The authors begin by observing that thecircumpolar Inuit ‘and likewise many other societies … have two socialstructures, one in summer and one in winter, and that in parallel they havetwo systems of law and religion’. In the summer, Inuit dispersed into bandsof roughly twenty or thirty people to pursue freshwater ﬁsh, caribou andreindeer, all under the authority of a single male elder. During this period,property was possessively marked and patriarchs exercised coercive,sometimes even tyrannical power over their kin – much more so than theNambikwara chiefs in the dry season. But in the long winter months, whenseals and walrus ﬂocked to the Arctic shore, there was a dramatic reversal.Then, Inuit gathered together to build great meeting houses of wood, whalerib and stone; within these houses, virtues of equality, altruism andcollective life prevailed. Wealth was shared, and husbands and wivesexchanged partners under the aegis of Sedna, the Goddess of the Sea.44 

Mauss thought the Inuit were an ideal case study because, living in theArctic, they were facing some of the most extreme environmental constraints it was possible to endure. Yet even in sub-Arctic conditions,Mauss calculated, physical considerations – availability of game, buildingmaterials and the like – explained at best 40 per cent of the picture. (Othercircumpolar peoples, he noted, including close neighbours of the Inuitfacing near-identical physical conditions, organized themselves quitedifferently.) To a large extent, he concluded, Inuit lived the way they didbecause they felt that’s how humans ought to live.
Around the same time that Marcel Mauss was combing French librariesfor everything that had ever been written about the Inuit, the Germanethnologist Franz Boas was carrying out research on the Kwakiutl,indigenous hunter-gatherers of Canada’s Northwest Coast. Here, Boasdiscovered, it was winter – not summer – that was the time when societycrystallized into its most hierarchical forms, and spectacularly so. Plank-built palaces sprang to life along the coastline of British Columbia, withhereditary nobles holding court over compatriots classiﬁed as commonersand slaves, and hosting the great banquets known as potlatch. Yet these aristocratic courts broke apart for the summer work of the ﬁshing season,reverting to smaller clan formations – still ranked, but with entirelydifferent and much less formal structures. In this case, people actuallyadopted different names in summer and winter – literally becomingsomeone else, depending on the time of year.45 

Emigrating to the US, Boas went on to become a professor at New York’sColumbia University, where he ended up training virtually everyone whowas to make a name for themselves in American anthropology for the nexthalf-century. One of his students, a Viennese-born ethnographer namedRobert Lowie (who was also a close friend of Paul Radin, author ofPrimitive Man as Philosopher) did ﬁeldwork among the Mandan-Hidatsaand Crow people of what are now Montana and Wyoming, and spent muchof his career thinking through the political implications of seasonalvariation among nineteenth-century tribal confederacies on the Great Plains.
Plains nations were one-time farmers who had largely abandoned cerealagriculture, after re-domesticating escaped Spanish horses and adopting alargely nomadic mode of life. In late summer and early autumn, small andhighly mobile bands of Cheyenne and Lakota would congregate in largesettlements to make logistical preparations for the buffalo hunt. At this mostsensitive time of year they appointed a police force that exercised fullcoercive powers, including the right to imprison, whip or ﬁne any offender who endangered the proceedings. Yet, as Lowie observed, this ‘unequivocalauthoritarianism’ operated on a strictly seasonal and temporary basis. Oncethe hunting season – and the collective Sun Dance rituals that followed –were complete, such authoritarianism gave way to what he called ‘anarchic’forms of organization, society splitting once again into small, mobile bands.Lowie’s observations are startling: 
In order to ensure a maximum kill, a police force – either coincidingwith a military club, or appointed ad hoc, or serving by virtue ofclan afﬁliation – issued orders and restrained the disobedient. In most of the tribes they not only conﬁscated game clandestinelyprocured, but whipped the offender, destroyed his property, and, incase of resistance, killed him. The very same organisation which ina murder case would merely use moral suasion turned into aninexorable State agency during a buffalo drive. However …coercive measures extended considerably beyond the hunt: thesoldiers also forcibly restrained braves intent on starting war partiesthat were deemed inopportune by the chief; directed massmigrations; supervised the crowds at a major festival; and mightotherwise maintain law and order.46 

‘During a large part of the year,’ Lowie continued, ‘the tribe simply did notexist as such; and the families or minor unions of familiars that jointlysought a living required no special disciplinary organization. The soldierswere thus a concomitant of numerically strong aggregations, hencefunctioned intermittently rather than continuously.’ But the soldiers’sovereignty, he stressed, was no less real for its temporary nature. As aresult, Lowie insisted that Plains Indians did in fact know something ofstate power, even though they never actually developed a state.
It’s easy to see why the neo-evolutionists of the 1950s and 1960s mightnot have known quite what to do with this legacy of ﬁeldwork observations.They were arguing for the existence of discrete stages of politicalorganization – successively: bands, tribes, chiefdoms, states – and held thatthe stages of political development mapped, at least very roughly, on tosimilar stages of economic development: hunter-gatherers, gardeners,farmers, industrial civilization. It was confusing enough that people like theNambikwara seemed to jump back and forth, over the course of the year, between economic categories. The Cheyenne, Crow, Assiniboine or Lakotawould appear to jump regularly from one end of the political spectrum tothe other. They were a kind of band/state amalgam. In other words, theythrew everything askew.
Still, Lowie is absolutely unequivocal on this point, and he was by nomeans the only anthropologist to observe it.47 Most interestingly for ourown perspective, he too stressed that the Plains Indians were consciouspolitical actors, keenly aware of the possibilities and dangers ofauthoritarian power. Not only did they dismantle all means of exercisingcoercive authority the moment the ritual season was over, they were alsocareful to rotate which clan or warrior clubs got to wield it: anyone holdingsovereignty one year would be subject to the authority of others in the next.48 

Scholarship does not always advance. Sometimes it slips backwards. Ahundred years ago, most social scientists understood that those who livemainly from wild resources were not normally restricted to tiny ‘bands’. Aswe’ve seen, the assumption that they were only gained ground in the 1960s.In this regard, our earlier invocation of biker gangs and hippie communeswasn’t entirely whimsical. These were the images being bounced around inthe popular imagination at that time, and invoked in debates about humannature. It’s surely no coincidence that the most popular ethnographic ﬁlmsof the post-war era either focused on the Kalahari Bushmen and MbutiPygmies (‘band’ societies, which could be imagined as roughly resemblinghippie communes); or on the Yanomami or ‘ﬁerce people’ (Amazonianhorticulturalists who, in Napoleon Chagnon’s version of reality – but not,let’s recall, in Helena Valero’s – do bear a rather disturbing resemblance toHell’s Angels).
Since in this new, evolutionist narrative ‘states’ were deﬁned above all bytheir monopoly on the ‘legitimate use of coercive force’, the nineteenth-century Cheyenne or Lakota would have been seen as evolving from the‘band’ level to the ‘state’ level roughly every November, and thendevolving back again come spring. Obviously, this is silly. No one wouldseriously suggest such a thing. Still, it’s worth pointing out because itexposes the much deeper silliness of the initial assumption: that societiesmust necessarily progress through a series of evolutionary stages to beginwith. You can’t speak of an evolution from band to tribe to chiefdom to state if your starting points are groups that move ﬂuidly between them as amatter of habit. 
Seasonal dualism also throws into chaos more recent efforts at classifyinghunter-gatherers into either ‘simple’ or ‘complex’ types, since what havebeen identiﬁed as the diagnostic features of ‘complexity’ – territoriality,social ranks, material wealth or competitive display – appear during certainseasons of the year, only to be brushed aside in others by the exact samepopulation. Admittedly, most professional anthropologists nowadays havecome to recognize that these categories are hopelessly inadequate, but themain effect of this acknowledgement has just been to cause them to changethe subject, or suggest that perhaps we shouldn’t really be thinking aboutthe broad sweep of human history at all any more. Nobody has yet proposedan alternative. 
Meanwhile, as we’ve seen, archaeological evidence is piling up tosuggest that in the highly seasonal environments of the last Ice Age, ourremote ancestors were behaving much like the Inuit, Nambikwara or Crow.They shifted back and forth between alternative social arrangements,building monuments and then closing them down again, allowing the rise ofauthoritarian structures during certain times of year then dismantling them –all, it would seem, on the understanding that no particular social order wasever ﬁxed or immutable. The same individual could experience life in whatlooks to us sometimes like a band, sometimes a tribe, and sometimes likesomething with at least some of the characteristics we now identify withstates. 
With such institutional ﬂexibility comes the capacity to step outside theboundaries of any given structure and reﬂect; to both make and unmake thepolitical worlds we live in. If nothing else, this explains the ‘princes’ and‘princesses’ of the last Ice Age, who appear to show up, in such magniﬁcentisolation, like characters in some kind of fairy tale or costume drama.Maybe they were almost literally so. If they reigned at all, then perhaps itwas, like the ruling clans of Stonehenge, just for a season.49 

WHY THE REAL QUESTION IS NOT ‘WHAT ARE THE ORIGINS
OF SOCIAL INEQUALITY?’ BUT ‘HOW DID WE GET STUCK?’ 
If we are right, and if human beings really have spent most of the last40,000 or so years moving back and forth between different forms of social organization, building up hierarchies then dismantling them again, theimplications are profound. For one thing, it suggests that Pierre Clastreswas quite right when he proposed that, rather than being less politicallyself-conscious than people nowadays, people in stateless societies mightactually have been considerably more so.
Clastres was another product of the 1960s. A student of Lévi-Strauss, hetook to heart his master’s view of Amazonian chiefs as mature politicalactors. But Clastres was also an anarchist (he was ultimately kicked out ofLévi-Strauss’s research group on a ﬂimsy pretext, involving unauthorizeduse of ofﬁcial stationery), and he took the argument much further. It wasn’tjust that Amazonian chiefs were calculating politicians. They werecalculating politicians forced to manoeuvre in a social environmentapparently designed to ensure they could never exercise real politicalpower. In the winter, the groups they led were tiny and inconsequential. Inthe summer, they didn’t ‘lead’ at all. Yes, their houses might haveresembled social service dispensaries in modern welfare states; but as aresult, in terms of material wealth, they were actually the poorest men in thevillage, since chiefs were expected constantly to give everything away.They were also expected to set an example by working much harder thaneverybody else. Even where they did have special privileges, like the Tupior Nambikwara chiefs, who were the only men in their villages allowed tohave multiple wives, the privilege was distinctly double-edged. The wiveswere held to be necessary to prepare feasts for the village. If any of thosewives looked to other lovers, which it appears they ordinarily did, there wasnothing much the chief could do about it, since he had to keep himself ineveryone’s good graces to remain chief.
Chiefs found themselves in this situation, Clastres argued, because theyweren’t the only ones who were mature and insightful political actors;almost everyone was. Rather than being trapped in some sort ofRousseauian innocence, unable to imagine more complex forms oforganization, people were generally more capable than we are of imaginingalternative social orders, and therefore had created ‘societies against thestate’. They had self-consciously organized in such a way that the forms ofarbitrary power and domination we associate with ‘advanced politicalsystems’ could never possibly emerge.
Clastres’s argument was, as one might imagine, highly controversial.Some of the criticism directed at him was entirely justiﬁed (he had, for example, an enormous blind spot when it came to gender). Still, most of itwas based on ﬁrm Rousseauian ground, insisting Clastres was ascribing toomuch imagination to ‘primitive’ or ‘archaic’ people who, almost bydeﬁnition, shouldn’t have any. How could one possibly claim, so suchcriticism went, that stateless societies were self-consciously organizingthemselves to prevent the emergence of something they’d never actuallyexperienced?
There are a lot of possible ways in which to respond to this objection.Were Amazonians of centuries past, for instance, entirely unaware of thegreat Andean empires to their west? People used to get around. It’s unlikelythey simply had no idea of developments in neighbouring parts of thecontinent. As we’ll see in Chapter Seven, there is also now a good deal ofevidence for the existence of large polities in Amazonia itself, in muchearlier times. Perhaps these were the children of rebels who ﬂed or evenoverthrew such ancient kingdoms. But the most obvious objection is that, ifthe Amazonians in question were anything like the Nambikwara, theyactually did experience relations of arbitrary command during their yearly‘adventures’ as foraging bands. Yet, oddly, Clastres himself never pointedthis out. In fact, he never really talks about seasonality at all.
This is a curious omission. It’s also an important one because, by leavingit out, Clastres really put the ﬁnal nail in the cofﬁn of that earlier traditionrunning from Marcel Mauss through to Robert Lowie; a tradition whichtreated ‘primitive’ societies as inherently ﬂexible, and typicallycharacterized by multiple forms of organization. Now, both the neo.evolutionists who saw ‘primitive’ folk as Rousseauian naïfs and the radicals who insisted they were self-conscious egalitarians equally took it forgranted they were stuck in a single, very simple mode of social existence.
In Clastres’s case it’s all the more surprising, because in his originalstatement on the powerlessness of Indian chiefs, published in 1962, he isquite candid in admitting he pinched almost his entire argument fromLowie. Fourteen years earlier, Lowie had argued that most indigenousAmerican societies, from Montreal to Tierra del Fuego, were effectivelyanarchists.50 His argument that the ‘typical Indian chief is not a lawgiver,executive, or judge, but a paciﬁer, a benefactor of the poor, and a prolixPolonius’ (that is, the actual functions of chieﬂy ofﬁce are to (1) mediatequarrels, (2) provide for the needy, and (3) to entertain with beautifulspeeches) is precisely echoed, point by point, in Clastres’s account. So is Lowie’s conclusion that, since the chieﬂy ofﬁce is effectively designed so itcan never be turned into a means of compulsion, the only way state-likeauthority could possibly have emerged was from religious visionaries ofone sort or another. 
Recall, though, that Lowie’s original piece included one additionalsection, on the ‘evolutionary germs’ of top-down authority, which describesthe seasonal ‘police’ and ‘soldiers’ of the Plains societies in detail. Clastressimply left it out. Why?
The answer is probably a simple one: seasonality was confusing. In fact,it’s kind of a wild card. The societies of the Great Plains created structures of coercive authority that lasted throughout the entire season of hunting andthe rituals that followed, dissolving when they dispersed into smallergroups. But those of central Brazil dispersed into foraging bands as a wayof asserting a political authority that was ineffectual in village settings.Among the Inuit, fathers ruled in the summertime; but in winter gatheringspatriarchal authority and even norms of sexual propriety were challenged,subverted or simply melted away. The Kwakiutl were hierarchical at bothtimes of year, but nonetheless maintained different forms of hierarchy,giving effective police powers to performers in the Midwinter Ceremonial(the ‘bear dancers’ and ‘fool dancers’) that could be exercised only duringthe actual performance of the ritual. At other times, aristocrats commandedgreat wealth but couldn’t give their followers direct orders. Many CentralAfrican forager societies are egalitarian all year round, but appear toalternate monthly between a ritual order dominated by men and anotherdominated by women.51 

In other words, there is no single pattern. The only consistentphenomenon is the very fact of alteration, and the consequent awareness ofdifferent social possibilities. What all this conﬁrms is that searching for ‘theorigins of social inequality’ really is asking the wrong question.
If human beings, through most of our history, have moved back and forthﬂuidly between different social arrangements, assembling and dismantlinghierarchies on a regular basis, maybe the real question should be ‘how didwe get stuck?’ How did we end up in one single mode? How did we losethat political self-consciousness, once so typical of our species? How didwe come to treat eminence and subservience not as temporary expedients,or even the pomp and circumstance of some kind of grand seasonal theatre, but as inescapable elements of the human condition? If we started out justplaying games, at what point did we forget that we were playing? 
We’ll be tackling such questions in the chapters to come. For the moment,the main thing to stress is that this ﬂexibility, and potential for political self-consciousness, was never entirely lost. Mauss pointed out much the samething. Seasonality is still with us – even if it is a pale, contracted shadow ofits former self. In the Christian world, for instance, there is still themidwinter ‘holiday season’ in which values and forms of organization do,to a limited degree, reverse themselves: the same media and advertiserswho for most of the year peddle rabid consumerist individualism suddenlystart announcing that social relations are what’s really important, and that togive is better than to receive. (And in enlightened countries like Mauss’sFrance, there’s also the summer grandes vacances in which everybodydowns tools for a month and ﬂees the cities.)
There is a direct historical connection here. We’ve already seen how,among societies like the Inuit or Kwakiutl, times of seasonal congregationwere also ritual seasons, almost entirely given over to dances, rites anddramas. Sometimes these could involve creating temporary kings or evenritual police with real coercive powers (though often, peculiarly, these ritualpolice doubled as clowns).52 In other cases, they involved dissolvingnorms of hierarchy and propriety, as in the Inuit midwinter orgies. Thisdichotomy can still be observed in festive life almost everywhere. In theEuropean Middle Ages, to take a familiar example, saints’ days alternatedbetween solemn pageants where all the elaborate ranks and hierarchies offeudal life were made manifest (much as they still are in, say, a collegegraduation ceremony, when we temporarily revert to medieval garb), andcrazy carnivals in which everyone played at ‘turning the world upsidedown’. In carnival, women might rule over men, children be put in chargeof government, servants could demand work from their masters, ancestorscould return from the dead, ‘carnival kings’ could be crowned and thendethroned, giant monuments like wicker dragons built and set on ﬁre, or allformal ranks might even disintegrate into one or other form of Bacchanalianchaos.53 

Just as with seasonality, there’s no consistent pattern. Ritual occasionscan either be much more stiff and formal, or much more wild and playful,than ordinary life. Alternatively, like funerals and wakes, they can slip back and forth between the two. The same seems to be true of festive life almost everywhere, whether it’s Peru, Benin or China. This is why anthropologistsoften have such trouble deﬁning what a ‘ritual’ even is. If you start from thesolemn ones, ritual is a matter of etiquette, propriety: High Church ritual,for example, is really just a very elaborate version of table manners. Somehave gone so far as to argue that what we call ‘social structure’ only reallyexists during rituals: think here of families that only exist as a physicalgroup during marriages and funerals, during which times questions of rankand priority have to be worked out by who sits at which table, who speaksﬁrst, who gets the topmost cut of the hump of a sacriﬁced water buffalo, orthe ﬁrst slice of wedding cake.
But sometimes festivals are moments where entirely different socialstructures take over, such as the ‘youth abbeys’ that seem to have existedacross medieval Europe, with their Boy Bishops, May Queens, Lords ofMisrule, Abbots of Unreason and Princes of Sots, who during theChristmas, Mayday or carnival season temporarily took over many of thefunctions of government and enacted a bawdy parody of government’severyday forms. So there’s another school of thought which says that ritualsare really exactly the opposite. The really powerful ritual moments arethose of collective chaos, effervescence, liminality or creative play, out ofwhich new social forms can come into the world.54 

There is also a centuries-long, and frankly not very enlightening, debateover whether the most apparently subversive popular festivals were reallyas subversive as they seem; or if they are really conservative, allowingcommon folk a chance to blow off a little steam and give vent to their baserinstincts before returning to everyday habits of obedience.55 It strikes us that all this rather misses the point.
What’s really important about such festivals is that they kept the oldspark of political self-consciousness alive. They allowed people to imaginethat other arrangements are feasible, even for society as a whole, since itwas always possible to fantasize about carnival bursting its seams andbecoming the new reality. In the popular Babylonian story of Semiramis,the eponymous servant girl convinces the Assyrian king to let her be‘Queen for a Day’ during some annual festival, promptly has him arrested,declares herself empress and leads her new armies to conquer the world.May Day came to be chosen as the date for the international workers’holiday largely because so many British peasant revolts had historically begun on that riotous festival. Villagers who played at ‘turning the worldupside’ would periodically decide they actually preferred the world upsidedown, and took measures to keep it that way.
Medieval peasants often found it much easier than medieval intellectualsto imagine a society of equals. Now, perhaps, we begin to understand why.Seasonal festivals may be a pale echo of older patterns of seasonal variation
– but, for the last few thousand years of human history at least, they appearto have played much the same role in fostering political self-consciousness,and as laboratories of social possibility. The ﬁrst kings may well have beenplay kings. Then they became real kings. Now most (but not all) existingkings have been reduced once again to play kings – as least insofar as theymainly perform ceremonial functions and no longer wield real power. Buteven if all monarchies, including ceremonial monarchies, were to disappear,some people would still play at being kings.
Even in the European Middle Ages, in places where monarchy wasunquestioned as a mode of government, ‘Abbots of Unreason’, YuletideKings and the like tended to be chosen either by election or by sortition(lottery), the very forms of collective decision-making that resurfaced,apparently out of nowhere, in the Enlightenment. (What’s more, suchﬁgures tended to exercise power much in the manner of indigenousAmerican chiefs: either limited to very circumscribed contexts, like the warchiefs who could give orders only during military expeditions; or likevillage chiefs who were arrayed with formal honours but couldn’t tellanybody what to do.) For a great many societies, the festive year could beread as a veritable encyclopaedia of possible political forms. 
WHAT BEING SAPIENS REALLY MEANS 
Let us end this chapter where we began it. For far too long we have beengenerating myths. As a result, we’ve been mostly asking the wrongquestions: are festive rituals expressions of authority, or vehicles for socialcreativity? Are they reactionary or progressive? Were our earliest ancestorssimple and egalitarian, or complex and stratiﬁed? Is human nature innocentor corrupt? Are we, as a species, inherently co-operative or competitive,kind or selﬁsh, good or evil?
Perhaps all these questions blind us to what really makes us human in theﬁrst place, which is our capacity – as moral and social beings – to negotiate between such alternatives. As we’ve already observed, it makes no sense toask any such questions of a ﬁsh or a hedgehog. Animals already exist in astate ‘beyond good and evil’, the very one that Nietzsche dreamed humansmight also aspire to. Perhaps we are doomed always to be arguing aboutsuch things. But certainly, it is more interesting to start asking otherquestions as well. If nothing else, surely the time has come to stop theswinging pendulum that has ﬁxated generations of philosophers, historiansand social scientists, leading their gaze from Hobbes to Rousseau, fromRousseau to Hobbes and back again. We do not have to choose any morebetween an egalitarian or hierarchical start to the human story. Let us bidfarewell to the ‘childhood of Man’ and acknowledge (as Lévi-Straussinsisted) that our early ancestors were not just our cognitive equals, but ourintellectual peers too. Likely as not, they grappled with the paradoxes ofsocial order and creativity just as much as we do; and understood them – atleast the most reﬂexive among them – just as much, which also means justas little. They were perhaps more aware of some things and less aware ofothers. They were neither ignorant savages nor wise sons and daughters ofnature. They were, as Helena Valero said of the Yanomami, just people, likeus; equally perceptive, equally confused.
Be this as it may, it’s becoming increasing clear that the earliest knownevidence of human social life resembles a carnival parade of politicalforms, far more than it does the drab abstractions of evolutionary theory. Ifthere is a riddle here it’s this: why, after millennia of constructing anddisassembling forms of hierarchy, did Homo sapiens – supposedly thewisest of apes – allow permanent and intractable systems of inequality totake root? Was this really a consequence of adopting agriculture? Ofsettling down in permanent villages and, later, towns? Should we belooking for a moment in time like the one Rousseau envisaged, whensomebody ﬁrst enclosed a tract of land, declaring: ‘This is mine and alwayswill be!’ Or is that another fool’s errand? 
These are the questions to which we now turn. 

4 

Free People, the Origin of Cultures, and the Advent ofPrivate Property 
(Not necessarily in that order) 
Changing your social identity with the changing seasons might sound like awonderful idea, but it’s not something anyone reading this book is everlikely to experience ﬁrst-hand. Yet until very recently, the Europeancontinent was still littered with folk practices that echoed these ancientrhythmic oscillations of social structure. Folklorists have long puzzled overall the little brigades of people disguised as plants and animals, the StrawBears and Green Men, who marched dutifully out each spring and autumninto village squares, everywhere from rural England to the RhodopeMountains of southern Bulgaria: were they genuine traces of ancientpractices, or recent revivals and reinventions? Or revivals of traces? Ortraces of revivals? It’s often impossible to tell.
Most of these rituals have been gradually brushed aside as pagansuperstition or repackaged as tourist attractions (or both). For the most part,all we’re left with as an alternative to our mundane lives are our ‘national holidays’: frantic periods of over-consumption, crammed in the gapsbetween work, in which we entertain solemn injunctions that consumptionisn’t really what matters about life. As we’ve seen, our remote foragerancestors were much bolder experimenters in social form, breaking apartand reassembling their societies at different scales, often in radicallydifferent forms, with different value systems, from one time of year to thenext. The festive calendars of the great agrarian civilizations of Eurasia,Africa and the Americas turn out to be mere distant echoes of that world and the political freedoms it entailed.
Still, we could never have ﬁgured that out by material evidence alone. Ifall we had to go on were Palaeolithic ‘mammoth buildings’ on the Russian steppe, or the princely burials of the Ligurian Ice Age and their associatedphysical remains, scholars would no doubt be left scratching their headsuntil the sun explodes. Human beings may be (indeed, we’ve argued theyare) fundamentally imaginative creatures, but no one is that imaginative.You would have to be either extremely naive or extremely arrogant to thinkanybody could simply logic such matters out. (And even if someone didmanage to come up with anything like Nuer prophets, Kwakiutl clown-police or Inuit seasonal wife-swapping orgies, simply through logicalextrapolation they’d probably be instantly written off as kooks.)
This is precisely why the ethnographic record is so important. The Nuerand Inuit should never have been seen as ‘windows on to our ancestral past’. They are creations of the modern age just the same as we are – butthey do show us possibilities we never would have thought of and provethat people are actually capable of enacting such possibilities, even buildingwhole social systems and value systems around them. In short, they remindus that human beings are far more interesting than (other) human beings aresometimes inclined to imagine.
In this chapter, we’ll do two things. First, we’ll continue our storyforwards in time from the Palaeolithic, looking at some of the extraordinarycultural arrangements that emerged across the world before our ancestorsturned their hands to farming. Second, we’ll start answering the question weposed in the last chapter: how did we get stuck? How did some humansocieties begin to move away from the ﬂexible, shifting arrangements thatappear to have characterized our earliest ancestors, in such a way thatcertain individuals or groups were able to claim permanent power overothers: men over women; elders over youth; and eventually, priestly castes,warrior aristocracies and rulers who actually ruled? 
IN WHICH WE DESCRIBE HOW THE OVERALL COURSE OF HUMAN HISTORY HAS MEANT THAT MOST PEOPLE LIVE THEIR LIVES ON AN EVER-SMALLER SCALE AS POPULATIONS GET LARGER 
In order for these things to become possible, a number of other factors ﬁrsthad to fall into place. One is the very existence of what we wouldintuitively recognize as discrete ‘societies’ to begin with. It may not evenmake sense to describe the mammoth hunters of Upper Palaeolithic Europe as being organized into separate, bounded societies, in the way we talkabout the nations of Europe, or for that matter First Nations of Canada likethe Mohawk, Wendat or Montagnais-Naskapi.
Of course, we know almost nothing about the languages people werespeaking in the Upper Palaeolithic, their myths, initiation rituals, orconceptions of the soul; but we do know that, from the Swiss Alps to OuterMongolia, they were often using remarkably similar tools,1 playingremarkably similar musical instruments, carving similar female ﬁgurines,wearing similar ornaments and conducting similar funeral rites. What’smore, there is reason to believe that at certain points in their lives,individual men and women often travelled very long distances.2 
Surprisingly, current studies of hunter-gatherers suggest that this is almostexactly what one should expect.
Research among groups such as the East African Hadza or AustralianMartu shows that while forager societies today may be numerically small,their composition is remarkably cosmopolitan. When forager bands gatherinto larger residential groups these are not, in any sense, made up of a tight-knit unit of closely related kin; in fact, primarily biological relationsconstitute on average a mere 10 per cent of total membership. Mostmembers are drawn from a much wider pool of individuals, many fromquite far away, who may not even speak the same ﬁrst languages.3 This is true even for contemporary groups that are effectively encapsulated inrestricted territories, surrounded by farmers and pastoralists.
In earlier centuries, forms of regional organization might extendthousands of miles. Aboriginal Australians, for instance, could travelhalfway across the continent, moving among people who spoke entirelydifferent languages, and still ﬁnd camps divided into the same kinds oftotemic moieties that existed at home. What this means is that half the residents owed them hospitality, but had to be treated as ‘brothers’ and‘sisters’ (so sexual relations were strictly prohibited); while another halfwere both potential enemies and marriage partners. Similarly, a NorthAmerican 500 years ago could travel from the shores of the Great Lakes tothe Louisiana bayous and still ﬁnd settlements – speaking languagesentirely unrelated to their own – with members of their own Bear, Elk orBeaver clans who were obliged to host and feed them.4 

It’s difﬁcult enough to reconstruct how these forms of long-distanceorganization operated just a few centuries ago, before they were destroyed by the coming of European settlers. So we can really only guess howanalogous systems might have worked some 40,000 years ago. But thestriking material uniformities observed by archaeologists across very longdistances attest to the existence of such systems. ‘Society’, insofar as wecan comprehend it at that time, spanned continents.
Much of this seems counter-intuitive. We are used to assuming thatadvances in technology are continually making the world a smaller place. Ina purely physical sense, of course, this is true: the domestication of thehorse, and gradual improvements in seafaring, to take just two examples,certainly made it much easier for people to move around. But at the sametime, increases in the sheer number of human beings seem to have pulled inthe opposite direction, ensuring that, for much of human history, ever-diminishing proportions of people actually travelled – at least, over longdistances or very far from home. If we survey what happens over time, thescale on which social relations operate doesn’t get bigger and bigger; itactually gets smaller and smaller.
A cosmopolitan Upper Palaeolithic is followed by a complicated periodof several thousand years, beginning around 12,000 BC, in which it ﬁrstbecomes possible to trace the outlines of separate ‘cultures’ based on morethan just stone tools. Some foragers, after this time, continued followinglarge mammal herds; others settled on the coast and became ﬁsherfolk, orgathered acorns in forests. Prehistorians use the term ‘Mesolithic’ for thesepostglacial populations. Across large parts of Africa and East Asia, theirtechnological innovations – including pottery, ‘micro-lithic’ tool kits andstone grinding tools – signal new ways of preparing and eating wild grains,roots and other vegetables: chopping, slicing, grating, grinding, soaking,draining, boiling, and also ways of storing, smoking and otherwisepreserving meats, plant foods and ﬁsh.5 

Before long these had spread everywhere, and paved the way for thecreation of what we’d now call cuisine: the kind of soups, porridges, stews,broths and fermented beverages we’re familiar with today. But cuisines arealso, almost everywhere, markers of difference. People who wake up to ﬁshstews every morning tend to see themselves as a different sort of peoplefrom those who breakfast on a porridge of berries and wild oats. Suchdistinctions were no doubt echoed by parallel developments that are muchmore difﬁcult to reconstruct: different tastes in clothing, dancing, drugs,hairstyles, courtship rituals; different forms of kinship organization and styles of formal rhetoric. The ‘culture areas’ of these Mesolithic foragerswere still extremely large. True, the Neolithic versions that soon developedalongside them – associated with the ﬁrst farming populations – weretypically smaller; but for the most part they still spread out over territoriesconsiderably larger than most modern nation states.
Only much later do we begin to encounter the kind of situation familiarto anthropologists of Amazonia or Papua New Guinea, where a single rivervalley might contain speakers of half a dozen different languages, withentirely distinct economic systems or cosmological beliefs. Sometimes, ofcourse, this tendency towards micro-differentiation was reversed – as withthe spread of imperial languages like English or Han Chinese. But theoverall direction of history – at least until very recently – would seem to bethe very opposite of globalization. It is one of increasingly localallegiances: extraordinary cultural inventiveness, but much of it aimed atﬁnding new ways for people to set themselves off against each other. True,the larger regional networks of hospitality endured in some places.6 
Overall, though, what we observe is not so much the world as a wholegetting smaller, but most peoples’ social worlds growing more parochial,their lives and passions more likely to be circumscribed by boundaries ofculture, class and language.
We might ask why all this has happened. What are the mechanisms thatcause human beings to spend so much effort trying to demonstrate that theyare different from their neighbours? This is an important question. We shallbe considering it in much more detail in the following chapter.
For the moment, we simply note that the proliferation of separate socialand cultural universes – conﬁned in space and relatively bounded – musthave contributed in various ways to the emergence of more durable andintransigent forms of domination. The mixed composition of so manyforaging societies clearly indicates that individuals were routinely on themove for a plethora of reasons, including taking the ﬁrst available exit routeif one’s personal freedoms were threatened at home. Cultural porosity isalso necessary for the kind of seasonal demographic pulses that made itpossible for societies to alternate periodically between different politicalarrangements, forming massive congregations at one time of year, thendispersing into a multitude of smaller units for the remainder.
That is one reason why the majestic theatre of Palaeolithic ‘princely’burials – or even of Stonehenge – never seems to have gone too far beyond theatrics. Simply put, it’s difﬁcult to exercise arbitrary power in, say,January over someone you will be facing on equal terms again come July.The hardening and multiplication of cultural boundaries can only havereduced such possibilities. 
IN WHICH WE ASK WHAT, PRECISELY, IS EQUALIZED IN‘EGALITARIAN’ SOCIETIES? 
The emergence of local cultural worlds during the Mesolithic made it morelikely that a relatively self-contained society might abandon seasonaldispersal and settle into some kind of full-time, top-down, hierarchicalarrangement. In our terms, to get stuck. But of course, this in itself hardlyexplains why any particular society did, in fact, get stuck in sucharrangements. We are back to something not entirely different from the‘origins of social inequality’ problem – but by now, we can at least focus alittle more sharply on what the problem really is.
As we have repeatedly observed, ‘inequality’ is a slippery term, soslippery, in fact, that it’s not entirely clear what the term ‘egalitariansociety’ should even mean. Usually, it’s deﬁned negatively: as the absenceof hierarchies (the belief that certain people or types of people are superiorto others), or as the absence of relations of domination or exploitation. Thisis already quite complex, and the moment we try to deﬁne egalitarianism inpositive terms everything becomes much more so.
On the one hand, ‘egalitarianism’ (as opposed to ‘equality’, let alone‘uniformity’ or ‘homogeneity’) seems to refer to the presence of some kindof ideal. It’s not just that an outside observer would tend to see all membersof, say, a Semang hunting party as pretty much interchangeable, like thecannon-fodder minions of some alien overlord in a science ﬁction movie (this would, in fact, be rather offensive); but rather, that Semang themselvesfeel they ought to be the same – not in every way, since that would beridiculous, but in the ways that really matter. It also implies that this idealis, largely, realized. So, as a ﬁrst approximation, we can speak of anegalitarian society if (1) most people in a given society feel they reallyought to be the same in some speciﬁc way, or ways, that are agreed to beparticularly important; and (2) that ideal can be said to be largely achievedin practice. 
Another way to put this might be as follows. If all societies are organizedaround certain key values (wealth, piety, beauty, freedom, knowledge,warrior prowess), then ‘egalitarian societies’ are those where everyone (oralmost everyone) agrees that the paramount values should be, and generallyspeaking are, distributed equally. If wealth is what’s considered the mostimportant thing in life, then everyone is more or less equally wealthy. Iflearning is most valued, then everyone has equal access to knowledge. Ifwhat’s most important is one’s relationship with the gods, then a society isegalitarian if there are no priests and everyone has equal access to places ofworship.
You may have noticed an obvious problem here. Different societiessometimes have radically different systems of value, and what might bemost important in one – or at least, what everyone insists is most importantin one – might have very little to do with what’s important in another.Imagine a society in which everyone is equal before the gods, but 50 percent of the population are sharecroppers with no property and therefore nolegal or political rights. Does it really make sense to call this an ‘egalitariansociety’ – even if everyone, including the sharecroppers, insists that it’sreally only one’s relation to the gods that is ultimately important?
There’s only one way out of this dilemma: to create some sort ofuniversal, objective standards by which to measure equality. Since the timeof Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Adam Smith, this has almost invariablymeant focusing on property arrangements. As we’ve seen, it was only atthis point, in the mid to late eighteenth century, that European philosophersﬁrst came up with the idea of ranking human societies according to theirmeans of subsistence, and therefore that hunter-gatherers should be treatedas a distinct variety of human being. As we’ve also seen, this idea is verymuch still with us. But so is Rousseau’s argument that it was only theinvention of agriculture that introduced genuine inequality, since it allowedfor the emergence of landed property. This is one of the main reasonspeople today continue to write as if foragers can be assumed to live inegalitarian bands to begin with – because it’s also assumed that without theproductive assets (land, livestock) and stockpiled surpluses (grain, wool,dairy products, etc.) made possible by farming, there was no real materialbasis for anyone to lord it over anyone else.
Conventional wisdom also tells us that the moment a material surplusdoes become possible, there will also be full-time craft specialists, warriors and priests laying claim to it, and living off some portions of that surplus(or, in the case of warriors, spending the bulk of their time trying to ﬁgureout new ways to steal it from each other); and before long, merchants,lawyers and politicians will inevitably follow. These new elites will, asRousseau emphasized, band together to protect their assets, so the advent ofprivate property will be followed, inexorably, by the rise of ‘the state’.
We will scrutinize this conventional wisdom in more detail later. For now, sufﬁce to say that while there is a broad truth here, it is so broad as tohave very little explanatory power. For sure, only cereal-farming and grainstorage made possible bureaucratic regimes like those of Pharaonic Egypt,the Maurya Empire or Han China. But to say that cereal-farming wasresponsible for the rise of such states is a little like saying that thedevelopment of calculus in medieval Persia is responsible for the inventionof the atom bomb. It is true that without calculus atomic weaponry wouldnever have been possible. One might even make a case that the invention ofcalculus set off a chain of events that made it likely someone, somewhere,would eventually create nuclear weapons. But to assert that Al-Tusi’s workon polynomials in the 1100s caused Hiroshima and Nagasaki is clearlyabsurd. Similarly, with agriculture. Roughly 6,000 years stand between theappearance of the ﬁrst farmers in the Middle East and the rise of what weare used to calling the ﬁrst states; and in many parts of the world, farmingnever led to the emergence of anything remotely like those states.7 

At this juncture, we need to focus on the very notion of a surplus, and themuch broader – almost existential – questions it raises. As philosophersrealized long ago, this is a concept that poses fundamental questions aboutwhat it means to be human. One of the things that sets us apart from non.human animals is that animals produce only and exactly what they need;humans invariably produce more. We are creatures of excess, and this iswhat makes us simultaneously the most creative, and most destructive, ofall species. Ruling classes are simply those who have organized society insuch a way that they can extract the lion’s share of that surplus forthemselves, whether through tribute, slavery, feudal dues or manipulatingostensibly free-market arrangements.
In the nineteenth century, Marx and many of his fellow radicals didimagine that it was possible to administer such a surplus collectively, in anequitable fashion (this is what he envisioned as being the norm under‘primitive communism’, and what he thought could once again be possible in the revolutionary future), but contemporary thinkers tend to be moresceptical. In fact, the dominant view among anthropologists nowadays isthat the only way to maintain a truly egalitarian society is to eliminate thepossibility of accumulating any sort of surplus at all. 
The greatest modern authority on hunter-gatherer egalitarianism is, bygeneral consent, the British anthropologist James Woodburn. In the post.war decades Woodburn conducted research among the Hadza, a foragersociety of Tanzania. He also drew parallels between them and the SanBushmen and Mbuti Pygmies, as well as a number of other small-scalenomadic forager societies outside Africa, such as the Pandaram of southIndia or Batek of Malaysia.8 Such societies are, Woodburn suggests, theonly genuinely egalitarian societies we know of, since they are the onlyones that extend equality to gender relations and, as much as is practicable,to relations between old and young.
Focusing on such societies allowed Woodburn to sidestep the question ofwhat is being equalized and what isn’t, because populations like the Hadzaappear to apply principles of equality to just about everything it is possibleto apply them to: not just material possessions, which are constantly beingshared out or passed around, but herbal or sacred knowledge, prestige(talented hunters are systematically mocked and belittled), and so on. Allsuch behaviour, Woodburn insisted, is based on a self-conscious ethos, thatno one should ever be in a relation of ongoing dependency to anybody else.This echoes what we heard in the last chapter from Christopher Boehmabout the ‘actuarial intelligence’ of egalitarian hunter-gatherers, butWoodburn adds a twist: the real deﬁning feature of such societies is,precisely, the lack of any material surplus.
Truly egalitarian societies, for Woodburn, are those with ‘immediatereturn’ economies: food brought home is eaten the same day or the next;anything extra is shared out, but never preserved or stored. All this is instark contrast to most foragers, and all pastoralists or farmers, who can becharacterized as having ‘delayed return’ economies, regularly investingtheir energies in projects that only bear fruit at some point in the future.Such investments, he argues, inevitably lead to ongoing ties that canbecome the basis for some individuals to exercise power over others; what’smore, Woodburn assumes a certain ‘actuarial intelligence’ – Hadza andother egalitarian foragers understand all this perfectly well, and as a result they self-consciously avoid stockpiling resources or engaging in any long.term projects.
Far from rushing blindly for their chains like Rousseau’s savages,Woodburn’s ‘immediate return hunter-gatherers’ understand preciselywhere the chains of captivity loom, and organize much of their lives to keepaway from them. This might sound like the basis of something hopeful oroptimistic. Actually, it’s anything but. What it suggests is, again, that anyequality worth the name is essentially impossible for all but the verysimplest foragers. What kind of future might we then have in store? At best,we could perhaps imagine (with the invention of Star Trek replicators orother immediate-gratiﬁcation devices) that it might be possible, at somepoint in the distant future, to create something like a society of equals oncemore. But in the meantime, we are deﬁnitively stuck. In other words, this isthe Garden of Eden narrative all over again – just, this time, with the bar forparadise set even higher.
What’s really striking about Woodburn’s vision is that the foragers hefocuses on appear to have reached such profoundly different conclusionsfrom Kandiaronk, and several generations of First Nation critics before him,all of whom had trouble even imagining that differences of wealth could betranslated into systematic inequalities of power. Recall that the Americanindigenous critique, as we described it in Chapter Two, was initially aboutsomething very different: the perceived failure of European societies topromote mutual aid and protect personal liberties. Only later, onceindigenous intellectuals had more exposure to the workings of French andEnglish society, did it come to focus on inequalities of property. Perhaps weshould follow their initial train of thought.
Few anthropologists are particularly happy with the term ‘egalitariansocieties’, for reasons that should now be obvious; but it lingers on becauseno one has suggested a compelling alternative. The closest we’re aware ofis the feminist anthropologist Eleanor Leacock’s suggestion that mostmembers of what are called egalitarian societies seem less interested inequality per se than what she calls ‘autonomy’. What matters toMontagnais-Naskapi women, for instance, is not so much whether men andwomen are seen to be of equal status but whether women are, individuallyor collectively, able to live their lives and make their own decisions withoutmale interference.9 

In other words, if there is a value these women feel should be distributedequally, it is precisely what we would refer to as ‘freedom’. Perhaps thebest thing, then, would be to call these ‘free societies’; or even, followingthe Jesuit Father Lallemant’s verdict on the Montagnais-Naskapi’s Wendatneighbours, ‘free people’, each of whom ‘considers himself of as muchconsequence as the others; and they submit to their chiefs only in so far as itpleases them.’10 At ﬁrst glance, Wendat society, with its elaborateconstitutional structure of chiefs, speakers and other ofﬁce holders, mightnot seem an obvious choice for inclusion on a list of ‘egalitarian’ societies.But ‘chiefs’ are not really chiefs if they have no means to enforce orders.Equality, in societies such as those of the Wendat, was a direct consequenceof individual liberty. Of course, the same can be said in reverse: liberties arenot really liberties if one cannot act on them. Most people today alsobelieve they live in free societies (indeed, they often insist that, politicallyat least, this is what is most important about their societies), but thefreedoms which form the moral basis of a nation like the United States are,largely, formal freedoms. 
American citizens have the right to travel wherever they like – provided,of course, they have the money for transport and accommodation. They arefree from ever having to obey the arbitrary orders of superiors – unless, ofcourse, they have to get a job. In this sense, it is almost possible to say theWendat had play chiefs11 and real freedoms, while most of us today haveto make do with real chiefs and play freedoms. Or to put the matter moretechnically: what the Hadza, Wendat or ‘egalitarian’ people such as theNuer seem to have been concerned with were not so much formal freedoms as substantive ones.12 They were less interested in the right to travel thanin the possibility of actually doing so (hence, the matter was typicallyframed as an obligation to provide hospitality to strangers). Mutual aid –what contemporary European observers often referred to as ‘communism’ –was seen as the necessary condition for individual autonomy.
This might help explain at least some of the apparent confusion aroundthe term egalitarianism: it is possible for explicit hierarchies to emerge, butto nonetheless remain largely theatrical, or to conﬁne themselves to verylimited aspects of social life. Let us return for a moment to the SudaneseNuer. Ever since the Oxford social anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchardpublished his classic ethnography of them in the 1940s, the Nuer were heldout as the very paradigm for ‘egalitarian’ societies in Africa. They had nothing even remotely resembling institutions of government and werenotorious for the high value they placed on personal independence. But bythe 1960s, feminist anthropologists like Kathleen Gough were showing that,again, you couldn’t really speak of equality of status here: males in Nuercommunities were divided between ‘aristocrats’ (with ancestral connectionsto the territories where they live), ‘strangers’ and lowly war captives takenby force in raids on other communities. Neither were these purely formaldistinctions. While Evans-Pritchard had written off such differences as inconsequential, in reality, as Gough noted, difference in rank implieddifferential access to women. Only the aristocrats could easily assembleenough cattle to arrange what Nuer considered a ‘proper’ marriage – that is,one in which they could claim paternity over the children and thus beremembered as ancestors after their death.13 

So was Evans-Pritchard simply wrong? Not exactly. In fact, while rankand differential access to cattle became relevant when people werearranging marriages, they had almost no bearing in any othercircumstances. It would have been impossible, even at a formal event like adance or sacriﬁce, to determine who was ‘above’ anyone else. Mostimportantly, differences in wealth (cattle) never translated into the ability togive orders, or to demand formal obeisance. In an often-cited passageEvans-Pritchard wrote: 
That every Nuer considers himself as good as his neighbour is
evident in their every movement. They strut about like lords of the
earth, which, indeed, they consider themselves to be. There is no
master and no servant in their society, but only equals who regard
themselves as God’s noblest creation … even the suspicion of an
order riles a man and he either does not carry it out or he carries it
out in a casual and dilatory manner that is more insulting than a
refusal.14 

Evans-Pritchard is referring here to men. What about women?
While in everyday affairs, Gough found, women operated with much thesame independence as men, the marriage system did efface women’sfreedom to a degree. If a man paid the forty cattle typically required forbridewealth, this meant above all that he not only had the right to claimpaternity over a woman’s children but also acquired exclusive sexual access, which in turn usually meant the right to interfere with his wife’saffairs in other respects as well. However, most Nuer women were not‘properly’ married. In fact, the complexities of the system were such that alarge proportion found themselves ofﬁcially married to ghosts, or to otherwomen (who could be declared male for genealogical purposes) – in whichcase, how they went about becoming pregnant and raising their childrenwas nobody’s business but their own. Even in sexual life, then, for womenas for men, individual freedom was assumed unless there was some speciﬁcreason to curtail it. 
The freedom to abandon one’s community, knowing one will be welcomedin faraway lands; the freedom to shift back and forth between socialstructures, depending on the time of year; the freedom to disobeyauthorities without consequence – all appear to have been simply assumedamong our distant ancestors, even if most people ﬁnd them barelyconceivable today. Humans may not have begun their history in a state ofprimordial innocence, but they do appear to have begun it with a self-conscious aversion to being told what to do.15 If this is so, we can at leastreﬁne our initial question: the real puzzle is not when chiefs, or even kingsand queens, ﬁrst appeared, but rather when it was no longer possible simplyto laugh them out of court.
Now it is undoubtedly true that, over the broad sweep of history, we ﬁndever larger and more settled populations, ever more powerful forces ofproduction, ever larger material surpluses, and people spending ever moreof their time under someone else’s command. It seems reasonable to conclude there is some sort of connection between these trends. But the nature of that connection, and the actual mechanisms, are entirely unclear.In contemporary societies we consider ourselves free people largelybecause we lack political overlords. For us, it’s simply assumed that whatwe call ‘the economy’ is organized entirely differently, on the basis not offreedom but ‘efﬁciency’, and therefore that ofﬁces and shop ﬂoors aretypically arranged in strict chains of command. Unsurprising, then, that somuch current speculation on the origins of inequality focuses on economicchanges, and particularly the world of work.
Here too, we think, much of the available evidence has been widelymisconstrued. 
A focus on work is not precisely the same as a focus on property, thoughif one is trying to understand how control of property ﬁrst came to betranslated into power of command, the world of work would be the obviousplace to look. By framing the stages of human development largely aroundthe ways people went about acquiring food, men like Adam Smith andTurgot inevitably put work – previously considered a somewhat plebeianconcern – centre stage. There was a simple reason for this. It allowed themto claim that their own societies were self-evidently superior, a claim that –at the time – would have been much harder to defend had they used anycriterion other than productive labour.16 

Turgot and Smith began writing this way in the 1750s. They referred tothe apex of development as ‘commercial society’, in which a complexdivision of labour demanded the sacriﬁce of primitive liberties butguaranteed dazzling increases in overall wealth and prosperity. Over thenext several decades, the invention of the spinning jenny, Arkwright loomand, eventually, steam and coal power – and ﬁnally the emergence of apermanent (and increasingly self-conscious) industrial working class –completely shifted the terms of debate. Suddenly, there existed forces ofproduction previously undreamed of. But there was also a staggeringincrease in the number of hours that people were expected to work. In thenew mills, twelve- to ﬁfteen-hour days and six-day weeks were consideredstandard; holidays were minimal. (John Stuart Mill protested that ‘All thelabour-saving machinery that has hitherto been invented has not lessenedthe toil of a single human being.’)
As a result, and over the course of the nineteenth century, almosteveryone arguing about the overall direction of human civilization took itfor granted that technological progress was the prime mover of history, andthat if progress was the story of human liberation, this could only meanliberation from ‘unnecessary toil’: at some future time, science wouldeventually free us from at least the most degrading, onerous and soul-destroying forms of work. In fact, by the Victorian era many began arguingthat this was already happening. Industrialized farming and new labour.saving devices, they claimed, were already leading us towards a worldwhere everyone would enjoy an existence of leisure and afﬂuence – andwhere we wouldn’t have to spend most of our waking lives running about atsomeone else’s orders. 
Granted, this must have seemed a bizarre claim to radical trade unionistsin Chicago who, as late as the 1880s, had to engage in pitched battles withpolice and company detectives in order to win an eight-hour day – that is,obtain the right to a daily work regime that the average medieval baronwould have considered unreasonable to expect of his serfs.17 Yet, perhapsas a riposte to such campaigns, Victorian intellectuals began arguing thatexactly the opposite was true: ‘primitive man’, they posited, had beenengaged in a constant struggle for his very existence; life in early humansocieties was a perpetual chore. European or Chinese or Egyptian peasantstoiled from dawn till dusk to eke out a living. And so, it followed, even theawful work regimes of the Dickensian age were actually an improvementon what had come before. All we are arguing about, they insisted, is thepace of improvement. By the dawn of the twentieth century, such reasoninghad become universally accepted as common sense.
That is what made Marshall Sahlins’s 1968 essay ‘The Original AfﬂuentSociety’ such an epochal event, and is why we must now consider bothsome of its implications and its limitations. Probably the most inﬂuentialanthropological essay ever written, it turned that old Victorian wisdom –still prevalent in the 1960s – on its head, creating instant discussion anddebate, inspiring everyone from socialists to hippies. Whole schools ofthought (Primitivism, Degrowth) would likely have never come aboutwithout it. But Sahlins was also writing at a time when archaeologists stillknew relatively little about pre-agricultural peoples, at least compared towhat we know now. It might be best, then, ﬁrst to take a look at hisargument before turning to the evidence we have today and seeing how thepiece measures up against it. 
IN WHICH WE DISCUSS MARSHALL SAHLINS’S ‘ORIGINAL AFFLUENT SOCIETY’ AND REFLECT ON WHAT CAN HAPPEN WHEN EVEN VERY INSIGHTFUL PEOPLE WRITE ABOUT PREHISTORY IN THE ABSENCE OF ACTUAL EVIDENCE 
Marshall Sahlins started his career in the late 1950s as a neo-evolutionist. When ‘The Original Afﬂuent Society’ was published, he was still mostfamous for his work with Elman Service which proposed four stages ofhuman political development: from bands to tribes, chiefdoms and states.All these terms are still widely used today. In 1968, Sahlins accepted an invitation to spend a year in Claude Lévi-Strauss’s laboratoire in Paris,where, he later reported, he used to eat lunch in the cafeteria each day withPierre Clastres (who would go on to write Society Against the State),arguing about ethnographic data and whether or not society was ripe forrevolution. 
These were heady days in French universities, full of studentmobilizations and street ﬁghting that ultimately led up to the student/workerinsurrection of May 1968 (during which Lévi-Strauss maintained a haughtyneutrality, but Sahlins and Clastres became enthusiastic participants). In themidst of all this political ferment, the nature of work, the need for work, therefusal of work, the possibility of gradually eliminating work were allheated matters of debate in both political and intellectual circles.
Sahlins’s essay, perhaps the last truly great example of that genre of‘speculative prehistory’ invented by Rousseau, ﬁrst appeared in Jean-PaulSartre’s journal Les Temps modernes.18 It made the argument that, at leastwhen it comes to working hours, the Victorian narrative of continualimprovement is simply backwards. Technological evolution has notliberated people from material necessity. People are not working less. Allthe evidence, he argued, suggests that over the course of human history theoverall number of hours most people spend working has tended instead toincrease. Even more provocatively, Sahlins insisted that people in earlierages were not, necessarily, poorer than modern-day consumers. In fact, hecontended, for much of our early history humans might just as easily besaid to have lived lives of great material abundance.
True, a forager might seem extremely poor by our standards – but toapply our standards was obviously ridiculous. ‘Abundance’ is not anabsolute measure. It refers to a situation where one has easy access toeverything one feels one needs to live a happy and comfortable life. Bythose standards, Sahlins argued, most known foragers are rich. The fact thatmany hunter-gatherers, and even horticulturalists, only seem to have spentsomewhere between two and four hours a day doing anything that could beconstrued as ‘work’ was itself proof of how easy their needs were to satisfy.
Before continuing, it’s worth saying that the broad picture Sahlinspresented appears to be correct. As we pointed out above, the averageoppressed medieval serf still worked less than a modern nine-to-ﬁve ofﬁceor factory worker, and the hazelnut gatherers and cattle herders whodragged great slabs to build Stonehenge almost certainly worked, on average, less than that. It’s only very recently that even the richest countrieshave begun to turn such things around (obviously, most of us are notworking as many hours as Victorian stevedores, though the overall declinein working hours is probably not as dramatic as we think). And for much ofthe world’s population, things are still getting worse instead of better.
What stands the test of time less well is the image that most readers takeaway from Sahlins’s essay: of happy-go-lucky hunter-gatherers, spendingmost of their time lounging in the shade, ﬂirting, forming drum circles ortelling stories. And this has everything to do with the ethnographicexamples he was drawing on, largely the San, Mbuti and Hadza. 
In the last chapter, we suggested a number of reasons why !Kung San(Bushmen) on the margins of the Kalahari and Hadza of the SerengetiPlateau became so popular in the 1960s as exemplars of what early humansociety might have been like (despite being quite unusual, as foragers go).One reason was simply the availability of data: by the 1960s, they wereamong the only foraging populations left who still maintained somethinglike their traditional mode of life. It was also in this decade that anthropologists started carrying out time-allocation studies, recordingsystematically what members of different societies do over the course of atypical day and how much time they spend doing it.19 Such research with African foragers also seemed to resonate with the famous discoveries offossil hominins then being made by Louis and Mary Leakey in other partsof the continent, such as Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. Since some of thesemodern hunter-gatherers were living in savannah-like environments, notunlike the ones in which our species now appeared to have evolved, it wastempting to imagine that here – in these living populations – one mightcatch a glimpse of human society in something like its original state.
Moreover, the results of those early time-allocation studies came as anenormous surprise. It’s worth bearing in mind that, in the post-war decades,most anthropologists and archaeologists still very much took for granted theold nineteenth-century narrative of humanity’s primordial ‘struggle forexistence’. To our ears, much of the rhetoric commonplace at the time, evenamong the most sophisticated scholars, sounds startlingly condescending:‘A man who spends his whole life following animals just to kill them toeat,’ wrote the prehistorian Robert Braidwood in 1957, ‘or moving fromone berry patch to another, is really living just like an animal himself.’20 

Yet these ﬁrst quantitative studies comprehensively disproved suchpronouncements. They showed that, even in quite inhospitableenvironments like the deserts of Namibia or Botswana, foragers couldeasily feed everyone in their group and still have three to ﬁve days per weekleft for engaging in such extremely human activities as gossiping, arguing,playing games, dancing or travelling for pleasure.
Researchers in the 1960s were also beginning to realize that, far fromagriculture being some sort of remarkable scientiﬁc advance, foragers (whoafter all tended to be intimately familiar with all aspects of the growingcycles of food plants) were perfectly aware of how one might go aboutplanting and harvesting grains and vegetables. They just didn’t see anyreason why they should. ‘Why should we plant,’ one !Kung informant put it
– in a phrase cited ever since in a thousand treatises on the origins offarming – ‘when there are so many mongongo nuts in the world?’ Indeed,concluded Sahlins, what some prehistorians had assumed to be technicalignorance was really a self-conscious social decision: such foragers had‘rejected the Neolithic Revolution in order to keep their leisure’.21 
Anthropologists were still struggling to come to terms with all this whenSahlins stepped in to draw the larger conclusions.
The ancient forager ethos of leisure (the ‘Zen road to afﬂuence’) onlybroke down, or so Sahlins surmised, when people ﬁnally – for whateverreasons – began to settle in one place and accept the toils of agriculture.They did so at a terrible cost. It wasn’t just ever-increasing hours of toil thatfollowed but, for most, poverty, disease, war and slavery – all fuelled byendless competition and the mindless pursuit of new pleasures, new powersand new forms of wealth. With one deft move, Sahlins’s ‘Original AfﬂuentSociety’ used the results of time-allocation studies to pull the rug fromunder the traditional story of human civilization. Like Woodburn, Sahlinsbrushes aside Rousseau’s version of the Fall – the idea that, too foolish toreﬂect on the likely consequences of our actions in assembling, stockpilingand guarding property, we ‘ran blindly for our chains’22 – and takes us straight back to the Garden of Eden. If rejecting farming was a consciouschoice, then so was that act of embracing it. We chose to eat of the fruit ofthe tree of knowledge, and for this we were punished. As St Augustine putit, we rebelled against God, and God’s judgment was to cause our owndesires to rebel against our rational good sense; our punishment for originalsin is the inﬁnity of our new desires.23 

If there is a fundamental difference here from the biblical story, it’s thatthe Fall (according to Sahlins) didn’t happen just once. We didn’t collapseand then begin slowly to pull ourselves back up. When it comes to labourand afﬂuence, every new technological breakthrough seems to cause us tofall yet further. 
Sahlins’s piece is a brilliant morality tale. There is, however, one obviousﬂaw. The whole argument for an ‘original afﬂuent society’ rested on asingle fragile premise: that most prehistoric humans really did live in thespeciﬁc manner of African foragers. As Sahlins was perfectly willing toadmit, this was just a guess. In closing his essay, he asked whether‘marginal hunters such as the Bushmen of the Kalahari’ really were anymore representative of the Palaeolithic condition than the foragers ofCalifornia (who placed great value on hard work) or the Northwest Coast(with their ranked societies and stockpiles of wealth)? Perhaps not, Sahlinsconceded.24 This often overlooked observation is crucial. It’s not that Sahlins is suggesting that his own phrase ‘original afﬂuent society’ isincorrect. Rather, he acknowledges that, just as there might have been manyways for free peoples to be free, there might have been more than just oneway for (original) afﬂuent societies to be afﬂuent.
Not all modern hunter-gatherers value leisure over hard work, just as notall share the easy-going attitudes towards personal possessions of the !Kungor Hadza. Foragers in northwestern California, for instance, were notoriousfor their cupidity, organizing much of their lives around the accumulation ofshell money and sacred treasures and adhering to a stringent work ethic inorder to do so. The ﬁsher-foragers of the Canadian Northwest Coast, on theother hand, lived in highly stratiﬁed societies where commoners and slaveswere famously industrious. According to one of their ethnographers, theKwakiutl of Vancouver Island were not only well housed and fed, butlavishly supplied: ‘Each household made and possessed many mats, boxes,cedar-bark and fur blankets, wooden dishes, horn spoons, and canoes. Itwas as though in manufacturing as well as in food production there was nopoint at which further expenditure of effort in the production of more of thesame items was felt to be superﬂuous.’25 Not only did the Kwakiutlsurround themselves with endless piles of possessions, but they also putendless creativity into designing and crafting them, with results so strikingand intricately beautiful as to make them the pride of ethnographic museums the world over. (Lévi-Strauss remarked that turn-of-the-centuryKwakiutl were like a society where a dozen different Picassos wereoperative all at the same time.) This, surely, is a kind of afﬂuence. But oneentirely different from that of the !Kung or Mbuti.
Which, then, more resembled the original state of human affairs: theeasy-going Hadza, or the industrious foragers of northwestern California?By now it will be clear to the reader that this is just the kind of question weshouldn’t be asking. There was no truly ‘original’ state of affairs. Anyonewho insists that one exists is by deﬁnition trading in myths (Sahlins, atleast, was fairly honest about this). Human beings had many tens ofthousands of years to experiment with different ways of life, long beforeany of them turned their hands to agriculture. Instead we might do better tolook at the overall direction of change, so as to understand how it bears onour question: how humans came largely to lose the ﬂexibility and freedomthat seems once to have characterized our social arrangements, and endedup stuck in permanent relations of dominance and subordination.
To do this means continuing the story begun in Chapter Three, followingour foraging ancestors out of the Ice Age (or Pleistocene era) into a phaseof warmer global climate known as the Holocene. This will also take us faroutside Europe, to places like Japan and the Caribbean coast of NorthAmerica, where entirely new and unsuspected pasts are beginning toemerge; ones which – despite the stubborn efforts of scholars to shoehornthem into neat evolutionary boxes – look about as far from small, nomadic,egalitarian ‘bands’ as one can possibly imagine. 
IN WHICH WE SHOW HOW NEW DISCOVERIES CONCERNING ANCIENT HUNTER-GATHERERS IN NORTH AMERICA AND JAPAN ARE TURNING SOCIAL EVOLUTION ON ITS HEAD 
In modern-day Louisiana there is a place with the dispiriting name ofPoverty Point. Here you can still see the remains of massive earthworkserected by Native Americans around 1600 BC. With its plush green lawnsand well-trained coppices, today the site looks like something halfwaybetween a wildlife management area and a golf club.26 Grass-covered mounds and ridges rise neatly from carefully tended meadows, formingconcentric rings which suddenly vanish where the Bayou Macon has erodedthem away (bayou being derived, via Louisiana French, from the Choctaw word bayuk: marshy rivulets spreading out from the main channel of theMississippi). Despite nature’s best efforts to obliterate these earthworks,and early European settlers’ best efforts to deny their obvious signiﬁcance(perhaps these were the dwellings of an ancient race of giants, theyconjectured, or one of the lost tribes of Israel?), they endure: evidence foran ancient civilization of the Lower Mississippi and testimony to the scaleof its accomplishments.
Archaeologists believe these structures at Poverty Point formed amonumental precinct that once extended over 200 hectares, ﬂanked by twoenormous earthen mounds (the so-called Motley and Lower JacksonMounds) which lie respectively north and south. To clarify what this means,it’s worth noting that the ﬁrst Eurasian cities – early centres of civic life likeUruk in southern Iraq, or Harappa in the Punjab – began as settlements ofroughly 200 hectares in total. Which is to say that their entire layout couldﬁt quite comfortably within the ceremonial precinct of Poverty Point. Likethose early Eurasian cities, Poverty Point sprang from a great river, sincetransport by water, particularly of bulk goods, was in early times inﬁnitelyeasier than transport by land. Like them, it formed the core of a much largersphere of cultural interaction. People and resources came to Poverty Pointfrom hundreds of miles away, as far north as the Great Lakes and from theGulf of Mexico to the south. 
Seen from the air – a ‘god’s-eye’ view – Poverty Point’s standingremains look like some sunken, gargantuan amphitheatre; a place of crowdsand power, worthy of any great agrarian civilization. Somethingapproaching a million cubic metres of soil was moved to create itsceremonial infrastructure, which was most likely oriented to the skies, sincesome of its mounds form enormous ﬁgures of birds, inviting the heavens tobear witness to their presence. But the people of Poverty Point weren’tfarmers. Nor did they use writing. They were hunters, ﬁshers and foragers,exploiting a superabundance of wild resources (ﬁsh, deer, nuts, waterfowl)in the lower reaches of the Mississippi. And they were not the ﬁrst hunter-gatherers in this region to establish traditions of public architecture. Thesetraditions can be traced back far beyond Poverty Point itself, to around 3500 BC – which is also roughly the time that cities ﬁrst emerged in Eurasia.
As archaeologists often point out, Poverty Point is ‘a Stone Age site in anarea where there is no stone’, so the staggering quantities of lithic tools,weapons, vessels and lapidary ornaments found there must all have been originally carried from somewhere else.27 The scale of its earthworks implies thousands of people gathering at the site at particular times of year,in numbers outstripping any historically known hunter-gatherer population.Much less clear is what attracted them there with their native copper, ﬂint,quartz crystal, soapstone and other minerals; or how often they came, andhow long they stayed. We simply don’t know.
What we do know is that Poverty Point arrows and spearheads come inrich hues of red, black, yellow and even blue stone, and these are only thecolours we discern. Ancient classiﬁcations were no doubt more reﬁned. If stones were being selected with such care, we can only begin to imaginewhat was going on with cords, ﬁbres, medicines and any living thing in thelandscape treated as potential food or poison. Another thing we can be quitesure of is that ‘trade’ is not a useful way to describe whatever was going onhere. For one thing, trade goes two ways, and Poverty Point presents noclear evidence for exports, or indeed commodities of any sort. The absenceis strikingly obvious to anyone who’s studied the remains of early Eurasiancities like Uruk and Harappa, which do seem to have been engaged in livelytrade relations: these sites are awash with industrial quantities of ceramicpackaging, and the products of their urban crafts are found far and wide.
Despite its great cultural reach, there is nothing at all of this commodityculture at Poverty Point. In fact, it’s not clear if anything much was goingout from the site, at least in material terms, other than certain enigmatic clayitems known as ‘cooking balls’, which can hardly be considered tradegoods. Textiles and fabrics may have been important, but we also have toallow for the possibility that Poverty Point’s greatest assets were intangible.Most experts today view its monuments as expressions of sacred geometry,linked to calendar counts and the movement of celestial bodies. If anythingwas being stockpiled at Poverty Point, it may well have been knowledge:the intellectual property of rituals, vision quests, songs, dances andimages.28 

We can’t possibly know the details. But it’s more than just speculation tosay that ancient foragers were exchanging complex information across thisentire region, and in a highly controlled fashion. Material proof comes fromclose examination of the earthen monuments themselves. Through the greatvalley of the Mississippi, and some considerable way beyond, there existother smaller sites of the same period. The various conﬁgurations of theirmounds and ridges adhere to strikingly uniform geometrical principles, based on standard units of measurement and proportion apparently sharedby early peoples throughout a signiﬁcant portion of the Americas. Theunderlying system of calculus appears to have been based on thetransformational properties of equilateral triangles, ﬁgured out with the aidof cords and strings, and then extended to the laying-out of massiveearthworks. 
Published in 2004, this remarkable discovery by John E. Clark, anarchaeologist and authority on the pre-Columbian societies ofMesoamerica,29 has been greeted by the scholarly community withresponses ranging from lukewarm acceptance to plain disbelief, althoughnobody appears to have actually refuted it. Many prefer simply to ignore it.Clark himself seems surprised by his results. We will return to some widerimplications in Chapter Eleven, but for now we can simply note anassessment of Clark’s ﬁndings by two specialists in the ﬁeld, who accept theevidence he presents ‘not only for a standard unit of measurement but alsofor geometrical layouts and spacing intervals among ﬁrst-mound complexesfrom Louisiana to Mexico and Peru, which incorporate multiples of thatstandard’. At most, ﬁnding the same system of measurement across suchdistances may prove to be ‘one of contemporary archaeology’s mostprovocative revelations’, and at the very least, they conclude, ‘those whobuilt the works were not simple, ordinary foragers.’30 

Putting aside the (by now irrelevant) notion that there ever was such athing as ‘simple, ordinary foragers’, it has to be said that, even if Clark’stheory were true only for the Lower Mississippi and surrounding parts ofthe Eastern Woodlands,31 it would still be quite remarkable. For, unless weare dealing with some kind of amazing cosmic coincidence, it means thatsomeone had to convey knowledge of geometric and mathematicaltechniques for making accurate spatial measurements, and related forms oflabour organization, over very long distances. If this were the case, it seemslikely that they also shared other forms of knowledge as well: cosmology,geology, philosophy, medicine, ethics, fauna, ﬂora, ideas about property,social structure, and aesthetics.
In the case of Poverty Point, should this be conceived as a form ofexchange of knowledge for material goods? Possibly. But the movement ofobjects and ideas might have been organized any number of other ways aswell. All we know for sure is that the lack of an agricultural base does notseem to have stopped those who gathered on Poverty Point from creating something that to us would appear very much like little cities which, at leastduring certain times of year, hosted a rich and inﬂuential intellectual life. 
Today, Poverty Point is a National Park and Monument and UNESCOWorld Heritage Site. Despite these designations of international importance,its implications for world history have hardly begun to be explored. Ahunter-gatherer metropolis the size of a Mesopotamian city-state, PovertyPoint makes the Anatolian complex of Göbekli Tepe look like little morethan a ‘potbelly hill’ (which is, in fact, what ‘Göbekli Tepe’ means inTurkish). Yet outside a small community of academic specialists, and ofcourse local residents and visitors, very few people have heard of it.
The obvious question at this juncture must surely be: why isn’t PovertyPoint better known to audiences the world over? Why doesn’t it featuremore prominently (or at all) in discussions on the origins of urban life,centralization and their consequences for human history?
One reason, no doubt, is that Poverty Point and its predecessors (like themuch older mound complex at Watson’s Brake, in the nearby Ouachitabasin) have been placed in a phase of American prehistory known as the‘Archaic’. The Archaic period covers an immense span of time, between theﬂooding of the Beringia land bridge (which once linked Eurasia to theAmericas) around 8000 BC, and the initial adoption and spread of maize-farming in certain parts of North America, down to around 1000 BC. One word, for seven millennia of indigenous history. Archaeologists who ﬁrstgave the period its name – which is really more of a chronological slap inthe face – were basically declaring, ‘this is the period before anythingparticularly important was happening.’ So when undeniable evidence beganto appear that all sorts of important things were indeed happening, and notjust in the Mississippi basin, it was almost something of an archaeologicalembarrassment. 
On the shores of the Atlantic and around the Gulf of Mexico lie enigmatic structures: just as remarkable as Poverty Point, but even less wellknown. Formed out of shell in great accumulations, they range from smallrings to massive U-shaped ‘amphitheatres’ like those of St Johns Rivervalley in Northeast Florida. These were no natural features. They too werebuilt spaces where hunter-gatherer publics once assembled in theirthousands. Far to the north and west, on the other side of the continent,more surprises loom up from the windswept shores of British Columbia: 
settlements and fortiﬁcations of striking magnitude, dating back as far as2000 BC, facing a Paciﬁc already familiar with the spectacle of war andlong-range commerce.32 

On the matter of hunter-gatherer history, North America isn’t the onlypart of the world where evolutionary expectations are heading for a titaniccollision with the archaeological record. In Japan and neighbouring islands,another monolithic cultural designation – ‘J.mon’ – holds sway over morethan 10,000 years of forager history, from around 14,000 BC to 300 BC. Japanese archaeologists spend much time subdividing the J.mon period inways just as intricate as the more pioneering North American scholars nowdo with their ‘Archaic’. Everyone else, however, whether museumgoers orreaders of high-school textbooks, is still confronted with the starksingularity of the term ‘J.mon’, which, covering the long ages before rice-farming came to Japan, leaves us with an impression of drab conservatism,a time when nothing really happened. New archaeological discoveries arenow revealing just how wrong this is.
The creation of a new Japanese national past is a somewhat paradoxicalside effect of modernization. Since Japan’s economic take-off in the 1960s,many thousands of archaeological sites have been discovered, excavatedand meticulously recorded, either as a result of construction projects forroads, railways, housing or nuclear plants or as part of immense rescueefforts undertaken in the wake of environmental catastrophes such as the2011 T.hoku earthquake. The result is an immense archive ofarchaeological information. What begins to emerge from this data-labyrinthis an entirely different picture of what society was like before irrigated ricecultivation came to Japan from the Korean Peninsula.
Across the Japanese archipelago, between 14,000 and 300 BC, centennialcycles of settlement nucleation and dispersal came and went; monumentsshot up in wood and stone, and then were pulled down again or abandoned;elaborate ritual traditions, including opulent burials, ﬂourished anddeclined; specialized crafts waxed and waned, including remarkableaccomplishments in the arts of pottery, wood and lacquer. In traditions ofwild food procurement, strong regional contrasts are evident, ranging frommaritime adaptations to acorn-based economies, both using large storagefacilities for gathered resources. Cannabis came into use, for ﬁbres andrecreational drug use. There were enormous villages with grand storehouses 
and what seem to be ritual precincts, such as those found at SannaiMaruyama.33 

An entire, forgotten social history of pre-agricultural Japan is resurfacing,for now largely as a mass of data points and state heritage archives. Infuture, as the bits get pieced back together, who knows what will come intoview? 
Europe, too, bears witness to the vibrant and complex history of non.agricultural peoples after the Ice Age. Take the monuments called inFinnish Jätinkirkko, the ‘Giants’ Churches’ of the Bothnian Sea betweenSweden and Finland: great stone ramparts, some up to 195 feet long, raisedup in their tens by coastal foragers between 3000 and 2000 BC. Or the ‘BigIdol’, a seventeen-foot-tall totem pole with elaborate carvings rescued froma peat bog on the shores of Lake Shigirskoe, on the eastern slopes of theCentral Urals. Dating to around 8000 BC, the Idol is the lone survivor of along-lost tradition of large-scale wooden forager art which once producedmonuments that presided over northern skies. Then come the amber-soakedburials of Karelia and southern Scandinavia, with their elaborate gravegoods and corpses staged in expressive poses, echoing some forgottenetiquette of Mesolithic vintage.34 And, as we’ve seen, even the majorbuilding phases of Stonehenge, long associated with early farmers, are nowdated to a time when cereal cultivation was virtually abandoned andhazelnut-gathering once again took over in the British Isles, alongsidelivestock-herding.
Back in North America, some researchers are beginning to talk, a littleawkwardly, of the ‘New Archaic’, a hitherto unsuspected era of‘monuments without kings’.35 But the truth is that we still know preciouslittle of the political systems lying behind a now almost globally attestedphenomenon of forager monumentality, or indeed whether some of thosemonumental projects might have involved kings or other kinds of leaders.What we do know is that this changes forever the nature of the conversationabout social evolution in the Americas, Japan, Europe, and no doubt mostother places too. Clearly, foragers didn’t shufﬂe backstage at the close ofthe last Ice Age, waiting in the wings for some group of Neolithic farmersto reopen the theatre of history. Why, then, is this new knowledge so rarelyintegrated into our accounts of the human past? Why does almost everyone(everyone, at least, who is not a specialist on Archaic North America or J.mon Japan) still write as if such things were impossible before thecoming of agriculture?
Of course, those of us with no access to archaeological reports can beexcused. What information exists more widely tends to be restricted toscattered, and sometimes sensationalized, news summaries that are veryhard to put together into a single picture. Scholars and professionalresearchers, on the other hand, have to actually make a considerable effortto remain so ignorant. Let us consider for a moment some of the peculiarforms of intellectual acrobatics required. 
HOW THE MYTH THAT FORAGERS LIVE IN A STATE OF INFANTILE SIMPLICITY IS KEPT ALIVE TODAY (OR,INFORMAL FALLACIES) 
Let’s ﬁrst ask why even some experts apparently ﬁnd it so difﬁcult to shakeoff the idea of the carefree, idle forager band; and the twin assumption that‘civilization’ properly so called – towns, specialized craftspeople,specialists in esoteric knowledge – would be impossible withoutagriculture. Why would anyone continue to write history as if places likePoverty Point could never have existed? It can’t just be the whimsical resultof airy academic terminologies (‘Archaic’, ‘J.mon’ and so on). The realanswer, we suggest, has more to do with the legacy of European colonialexpansion; and in particular its impact on both indigenous and Europeansystems of thought, especially with regard to the expression of rights ofproperty in land.
Recall how – long before Sahlins’s notion of the ‘original afﬂuentsociety’ – indigenous critics of European civilization were already arguingthat hunter-gatherers were really better off than other people because theycould obtain the things they wanted and needed so easily. Such views canbe found as early as the sixteenth century – remember, for instance, theMi’kmaq interlocutors who annoyed Père Biard so much by insisting theywere richer than the French, for exactly that reason. Kandiaronk madesimilar arguments, insisting ‘the Savages of Canada, notwithstanding theirPoverty, are richer than you, among whom all sorts of crimes are committedupon the score of Mine and Thine.’36 

As we’ve seen, indigenous critics like Kandiaronk, caught in therhetorical moment, would frequently overstate their case, even playing along with the idea that they were blissful, innocent children of nature.They did this in order to expose what they considered the bizarreperversions of the European lifestyle. The irony is that, in doing so, theyoften played into the hands of those who argued that – being blissful andinnocent children of nature – they also had no natural rights to their land.
Here it’s important to understand a little of the legal basis fordispossessing people who had the misfortune already to be living interritories coveted by European settlers. This was, almost invariably, whatnineteenth-century jurists came to call the ‘Agricultural Argument’, aprinciple which has played a major role in the displacement of untoldthousands of indigenous peoples from ancestral lands in Australia, NewZealand, sub-Saharan Africa and the Americas: processes typicallyaccompanied by the rape, torture and mass murder of human beings, andoften the destruction of entire civilizations. 
Colonial appropriation of indigenous lands often began with someblanket assertion that foraging peoples really were living in a State ofNature – which meant that they were deemed to be part of the land but hadno legal claims to own it. The entire basis for dispossession, in turn, waspremised on the idea that the current inhabitants of those lands weren’treally working. The argument goes back to John Locke’s Second Treatise of Government (1690), in which he argued that property rights are necessarilyderived from labour. In working the land, one ‘mixes one’s labour’ with it;in this way it becomes, in a sense, an extension of oneself. Lazy natives,according to Locke’s disciples, didn’t do that. They were not, Lockeansclaimed, ‘improving landlords’ but simply made use of the land to satisfytheir basic needs with the minimum of effort. James Tully, an authority onindigenous rights, spells out the historical implications: land used forhunting and gathering was considered vacant, and ‘if the Aboriginal peoplesattempt to subject the Europeans to their laws and customs or to defend theterritories that they have mistakenly believed to be their property forthousands of years, then it is they who violate natural law and may bepunished or “destroyed” like savage beasts.’37 In a similar way, thestereotype of the carefree, lazy native, coasting through a life free frommaterial ambition, was deployed by thousands of European conquerors,plantation overseers and colonial ofﬁcials in Asia, Africa, Latin Americaand Oceania as a pretext for the use of bureaucratic terror to force local people into work: everything from outright enslavement to punitive taxregimes, corvée labour and debt peonage.
As indigenous legal scholars have been pointing out for years, the‘Agricultural Argument’ makes no sense, even on its own terms. There aremany ways, other than European-style farming, in which to care for andimprove the productivity of land. What to a settler’s eye seemed savage,untouched wilderness usually turns out to be landscapes actively managedby indigenous populations for thousands of years through controlledburning, weeding, coppicing, fertilizing and pruning, terracing estuarineplots to extend the habitat of particular wild ﬂora, building clam gardens inintertidal zones to enhance the reproduction of shellﬁsh, creating weirs tocatch salmon, bass and sturgeon, and so on. Such procedures were oftenlabour-intensive, and regulated by indigenous laws governing who couldaccess groves, swamps, root beds, grasslands and ﬁshing grounds, and whowas entitled to exploit what species at any given time of year. In parts ofAustralia, these indigenous techniques of land management were such that,according to one recent study, we should stop speaking of ‘foraging’altogether, and refer instead to a different sort of farming.38 

Such societies might not have recognized private property rights in thesame sense as Roman Law or English Common Law, but it’s absurd toargue they had no property rights at all. They simply had differentconceptions of property. This is true, incidentally, even of people like theHadza or !Kung; and, as we will see, many other foraging peoples actuallyhad extraordinarily complex and sophisticated conceptions of ownership.Sometimes these indigenous property systems formed the basis fordifferential access to resources, with the result that something like socialclasses emerged.39 Usually, though, this did not happen, because peoplemade sure that it didn’t, much as they made sure chiefs did not developcoercive power.
We should nonetheless recognize that the economic base of at least someforaging societies was capable of supporting anything from priestly castesto royal courts with standing armies. Let us take just one dramatic exampleto illustrate the point. 
One of the ﬁrst North American societies described by European explorersin the sixteenth century were the Calusa, a non-agricultural people whoinhabited the west coast of Florida, from Tampa Bay to the Keys. There they had established a small kingdom, ruled from a capital town calledCalos, which today is marked by a thirty-hectare complex of high shellmounds known as Mound Key. Fish, shellﬁsh and larger marine animalscomprised a major part of the Calusa diet, supplemented by deer, raccoonand a variety of birds. Calusa also maintained a ﬂeet of war canoes withwhich they would launch military raids on nearby populations, extractingprocessed foods, skins, weapons, amber, metals and slaves as tribute. WhenJuan Ponce de León entered Charlotte Harbor on 4 June 1513 he was met by a well-organized ﬂotilla of such canoes, manned by heavily armedhunter-gatherers.
Some historians resist calling the Calusa leader a ‘king’, preferring termslike ‘paramount chief’, but ﬁrst-hand accounts leave no doubt about hisexalted status. The man known as ‘Carlos’, the ruler of Calos at the time ofinitial European contact, even looked like a European king: he wore a golddiadem and beaded leg bands and sat on a wooden throne – and, crucially,he was the only Calusa allowed to do so. His powers seemed absolute. ‘Hiswill was law, and insubordination was punishable by death.’40 He was also responsible for performing secret rituals that ensured the renewal of nature.His subjects always greeted him by kneeling and raising their hands in agesture of obeisance, and he was typically accompanied by representativesof the ruling class of warrior nobles and priests who, like him, devotedthemselves largely to the business of government. And he had at hisdisposal the services of specialized craftsmen, including court metallurgistswho worked silver, gold and copper.
Spanish observers reported a traditional practice: that on the death of aCalusa ruler, or of his principal wife, a certain quota of their subjects’ sonsand daughters had to be put to death. By most deﬁnitions, all this wouldmake Carlos not just a king, but a sacred king, perhaps divine.41 We know less about the economic basis for these arrangements, but court life appearsto have been made possible not only by complex systems of access tocoastal ﬁshing grounds, which were exceedingly rich, but also by canalsand artiﬁcial ponds dug out of the coastal everglades. The latter, in turn,allowed for permanent – that is, non-seasonal – settlements (though mostCalusa did still scatter to ﬁshing and gathering sites at certain times of year,when the big towns grew decidedly smaller).42 

By all accounts, then, the Calusa had indeed ‘got stuck’ in a singleeconomic and political mode that allowed extreme forms of inequality to emerge. But they did so without ever planting a single seed or tethering asingle animal. Confronted with such cases, adherents of the view thatagriculture was a necessary foundation for durable inequalities have twooptions: ignore them, or claim they represent some kind of insigniﬁcantanomaly. Surely, they will say, foragers who do these kinds of things –raiding their neighbours, stockpiling wealth, creating elaborate courtceremonial, defending their territories and so on – aren’t really foragers atall, or at least not true foragers. Surely they must be farmers by othermeans, effectively practising agriculture (just with wild crops), or perhapssomehow caught in a moment of transition, ‘on the way’ to becomingfarmers, just not yet having quite arrived?
All these are excellent examples of what Antony Flew called the ‘NoTrue Scotsman’ style of argument (also known to logicians as the ‘ad hocrescue’ procedure). For those unfamiliar with it, it works like this: 
Imagine Hamish McDonald, a Scotsman, sitting down with hisGlasgow Morning Herald and seeing an article about how the‘Brighton Sex Maniac Strikes Again’. Hamish is shocked anddeclares that ‘No Scotsman would do such a thing.’ The next day hesits down to read his Glasgow Morning Herald again; and, this time,ﬁnds an article about an Aberdeen man whose brutal actions make the Brighton sex maniac seem almost gentlemanly. This fact showsthat Hamish was wrong in his opinion, but is he going to admit this?Not likely. This time he says: ‘No true Scotsman would do such a thing.’43 

Philosophers frown on this style of argumentation as a classic ‘informalfallacy’, or variety of circular argument. You simply assert a proposition
(e.g. ‘hunter-gatherers do not have aristocracies’), then protect it from anypossible counter-examples by continually changing the deﬁnition. We prefera consistent approach.
Foragers are populations which don’t rely on biologically domesticatedplants and animals as their primary sources of food. Therefore, if itbecomes apparent that a good number of them have in fact possessedcomplex systems of land tenure, or worshipped kings, or practised slavery,this altered picture of their activities doesn’t somehow magically turn theminto ‘proto-farmers’. Nor does it justify the invention of endless sub.categories like ‘complex’ or ‘afﬂuent’ or ‘delayed-return’ hunter-gatherers,which is simply another way of ensuring such peoples are kept in what theHaitian anthropologist Michel-Rolph Trouillot called the ‘savage slot’, theirhistories deﬁned and circumscribed by their mode of subsistence – as ifthey were people who really ought to be lazing around all day, but for somereason got ahead of themselves.44 Instead, it means that the initial assertionwas, like that of the apocryphal Hamish McDonald, simply wrong. 
IN WHICH WE DISPOSE OF ONE PARTICULARLY SILLY ARGUMENT THAT FORAGERS WHO SETTLE IN TERRITORIES THAT LEND THEMSELVES WELL TO FORAGING ARE SOMEHOW UNUSUAL 
In academic thought, there’s another popular way of propping up the mythof the ‘Agricultural Revolution’, and thereby writing off people like theCalusa as evolutionary quirks or anomalies. This is to claim that they onlybehaved the way they did because they were living in ‘atypical’environments. Usually, what’s meant by ‘atypical’ are wetlands of varioussorts – coasts and river valleys – as opposed to the remoter corners oftropical forests or desert margins, which is assumed to be where hunter-gatherers really ought to be living, since that is where most of them livetoday. It is a particularly weird argument, but a lot of very serious peoplemake it, so we’ll brieﬂy have to take it on.
Anyone who was still living mainly by hunting animals and gatheringwild foodstuffs in the early to mid twentieth century was almost certainlyliving on land no one else particularly wanted. That’s why so many of thebest descriptions of foragers come from places like the Kalahari Desert orArctic Circle. Ten thousand years ago, this was obviously not the case.Everyone was a forager; overall population densities were low. Foragerswere therefore free to live in pretty much any sort of territory they fancied.All things being equal, those living off wild resources would tend to cleaveto places where they were abundant. You would think this is self-evident,but apparently it isn’t.
Those who today describe people like the Calusa as ‘atypical’ becausethey had such a prosperous resource base want us to believe, instead, thatancient foragers chose to avoid locations of this kind, shunning the riversand coasts (which also offered natural arteries for movement and communication), because they were so keen to oblige later researchers byresembling twentieth-century hunter-gatherers (the sort for which detailedscientiﬁc data is available today). We are asked to believe that it was onlyafter they ran out of deserts and mountains and rainforests that theyreluctantly started to colonize richer and more comfortable environments.We might call this the ‘all the bad spots are taken!’ argument.
In fact, there was nothing atypical about the Calusa. They were just oneof many ﬁsher-forager populations living around the Straits of Florida –including the Tequesta, Pojoy, Jeaga, Jobe and Ais (some apparently ruledby dynasties of their own) – with whom Calusa conducted regular trade,fought wars and arranged dynastic marriages. They were also among theﬁrst Native American societies to be destroyed since, for obvious reasons,coasts and estuaries were the ﬁrst spots where Spanish colonizers landed,bringing epidemic diseases, priests, tribute and, eventually, settlers. Thiswas a pattern repeated on every continent, from America to Oceania, whereinvariably the most attractive ports, harbours, ﬁsheries and surroundinglands were ﬁrst snapped up by British, French, Portuguese, Spanish, Dutchor Russian settlers, who also drained tidal salt marshes and coastal lagoonsto farm cereals and cash crops.45 

Such was the fate of the Calusa and their ancient ﬁshing and huntinggrounds. When Florida was ceded to the British in the mid eighteenthcentury, the last handful of surviving subjects from the kingdom of Caloswere shipped off to the Caribbean by their Spanish masters. 
For most of human history, ﬁshers, hunters and foragers did not have tocontend with expansive empires; therefore, they themselves tended to be themost active human colonizers of aquatic environments. Archaeologicalevidence increasingly bears this out. It was long thought, for instance, thatthe Americas were ﬁrst settled by humans travelling mainly over land (theso-called ‘Clovis people’). Around 13,000 years ago they were supposed tohave followed an arduous crossing from Beringia, the land bridge betweenRussia and Alaska, passing south between terrestrial glaciers, over frozenmountains – all because, for some reason, it never occurred to any of themto build a boat and follow the coast. 
More recent evidence suggests a very different picture (or, as one Navajoinformant put it when faced with an archaeological map of the terrestrial 
route via Beringia: ‘maybe some other guys came over like that, but usNavajos came a different way’).46 

In fact, Eurasian populations made a much earlier entry to what was thena genuinely ‘New World’, some 17,000 years ago. What was more, they didindeed think to build boats, following a coastal route that passed around thePaciﬁc Rim, hopping between offshore islands and linear patches of kelpforest and ending somewhere on the southern coast of Chile. Early eastwardcrossings also took place.47 Of course, it’s possible that these ﬁrstAmericans, on arriving in such rich coastal habitats, quickly abandonedthem, preferring for some obscure reason to spend the rest of their livesclimbing mountains, hacking their way through forests and trekking acrossendless monotonous prairies. But it seems more plausible to assume that thebulk of them stayed exactly where they were, often forming dense andstable settlements in such locations. 
The problem is, until recently this has always been an argument fromsilence, since rising sea levels long ago submerged the earliest records ofshoreline habitation in most parts of the world. Archaeologists have tendedto resist the conclusion that such habitations must have existed despite thelack of physical remains; but, with advances in the investigation ofunderwater environments, the case is growing stronger. A distinctly soggier(but also frankly more commonsensical) account of early human dispersaland settlement is ﬁnally becoming possible.48 

IN WHICH WE FINALLY RETURN TO THE QUESTION OFPROPERTY, AND INQUIRE AS TO ITS RELATION TO THESACRED 
All this means that, of the many distinct cultural universes beginning to takeshape across the world in the Early Holocene, most were likely centred onenvironments of abundance rather than scarcity: more like the Calusa’s thanthe !Kung’s. Does this also mean they were likely to have similar politicalarrangements to the Calusa? Here some caution is in order.
That the Calusa managed to maintain a sufﬁcient economic surplus tosupport what looks to us like a miniature kingdom does not mean such anoutcome is inevitable as soon as a society is capable of stockpiling asufﬁcient quantity of ﬁsh. After all, the Calusa were seafaring people; theywould have undoubtedly been familiar with kingdoms ruled by divine monarchs like the Great Sun of the Natchez in nearby Louisiana and, likelyas not, the empires of Central America. It’s possible they were simplyimitating more powerful neighbours. Or maybe they were just odd. Finally,we don’t really know how much power even a divine king like Carlos reallyhad. Here it’s useful to consider the Natchez themselves: an agriculturalgroup, much better documented than the Calusa, and with a spectacular andpurportedly absolute monarch of their own.
The Natchez Sun, as the monarch was known, inhabited a village inwhich he appeared to wield unlimited power. His every movement wasgreeted by elaborate rituals of deference, bowing and scraping; he couldorder arbitrary executions, help himself to any of his subjects’ possessions,do pretty much anything he liked. Still, this power was strictly limited byhis own physical presence, which in turn was largely conﬁned to the royalvillage itself. Most Natchez did not live in the royal village (indeed, mosttended to avoid the place, for obvious reasons); outside it, royalrepresentatives were treated no more seriously than Montagnais-Naskapichiefs. If subjects weren’t inclined to obey these representatives’ orders,they simply laughed at them. In other words, while the court of the NatchezSun was not pure empty theatre – those executed by the Great Sun weremost deﬁnitely dead – neither was it the court of Suleiman the Magniﬁcentor Aurangzeb. It seems to have been something almost precisely inbetween. 
Was Calusa kingship a similar arrangement? Spanish observers clearlydidn’t think so (they regarded it as a more or less absolute monarchy), butsince typically half the point of such deadly theatrics is to impress outsiders,that tells us very little in itself.49 

What have we learned so far? 
Most obviously, that we can now put a ﬁnal nail in the cofﬁn of theprevailing view that human beings lived more or less like KalahariBushmen, until the invention of agriculture sent everything askew. Evenwere it possible to write off Pleistocene mammoth hunters as some kind ofstrange anomaly, the same clearly cannot be said for the period thatimmediately followed the glaciers’ retreat, when dozens of new societiesbegan to form along resource-rich coasts, estuaries and river valleys,gathering in large and often permanent settlements, creating entirely new industries, building monuments according to mathematical principles,developing regional cuisines, and so on.
We have also learned that at least some of these societies developed amaterial infrastructure capable of supporting royal courts and standingarmies – even though we have, as yet, no clear evidence that they actuallydid so. To construct the earthworks at Poverty Point, for instance, must havetaken enormous amounts of human labour and a strict regime of carefullyplanned-out work, but we still have little idea how that labour wasorganized. Japanese archaeologists, surveying thousands of years’ worth ofJ.mon sites, have discovered all sorts of treasures, but they are yet to ﬁndindisputable evidence that those treasures were monopolized by any sort ofaristocracy or ruling elite.
We cannot possibly know exactly which forms of ownership existed inthese societies. What we can suggest, and there’s plenty of evidence tosupport it, is that all the places in question – Poverty Point, SannaiMaruyama, the Kastelli Giant’s Church in Finland, or indeed the earlierresting places of Upper Palaeolithic grandees – were in some sense sacredplaces. This might not seem like saying very much, but it’s important: ittells us a lot more about the ‘origins’ of private property than is generallyassumed. In rounding off this discussion, we will try to explain why. 
Let’s turn again to the anthropologist James Woodburn, and a less well-known insight from his work on ‘immediate return’ hunter-gatherers. Evenamong those forager groups, famous for their assertive egalitarianism, henotes, there was one striking exception to the rule that no adult should everpresume to give direct orders to another, and that individuals should not layprivate claim to property. This exception came in the sphere of ritual, of thesacred. In Hadza religion and the religions of many Pygmy groups,initiation into male (and sometimes female) cults forms the basis ofexclusive claims to ownership, usually of ritual privileges, that stand inabsolute contrast to the minimization of exclusive property rights ineveryday, secular life. These various forms of ritual and intellectualproperty, Woodburn observed, are generally protected by secrecy, bydeception and often by the threat of violence.50 

Here, Woodburn cites the sacred trumpets that initiated males of certainPygmy groups keep hidden in secret places in the forest. Not only arewomen and children not supposed to know about such sacred treasures; should any follow the men to spy on them, they would be attacked or evenraped.51 Strikingly similar practices involving sacred trumpets, sacredﬂutes or other fairly obvious phallic symbols are commonplace in certaincontemporary societies of Papua New Guinea and Amazonia. Very oftenthere is a complex game of secrets, whereby the instruments areperiodically taken out of their hiding places and men pretend they are thevoices of spirits, or use them as part of costumed masquerades in whichthey impersonate spirits to terrify women and children.52 

Now, these sacred items are, in many cases, the only important andexclusive forms of property that exist in societies where personal autonomyis taken to be a paramount value, or what we may simply call ‘freesocieties’. It’s not just relations of command that are strictly conﬁned tosacred contexts, or even occasions when humans impersonate spirits; so toois absolute – or what we would today refer to as ‘private’ – property. Insuch societies, there turns out to be a profound formal similarity betweenthe notion of private property and the notion of the sacred. Both are,essentially, structures of exclusion.
Much of this is implicit – if never clearly stated or developed – in ÉmileDurkheim’s classic deﬁnition of ‘the sacred’ as that which is ‘set apart’:removed from the world, and placed on a pedestal, at some times literallyand at other times ﬁguratively, because of its imperceptible connection witha higher force or being. Durkheim argued that the clearest expression of thesacred was the Polynesian term tabu, meaning ‘not to be touched’. Butwhen we speak of absolute, private property, are we not talking aboutsomething very similar – almost identical in fact, in its underlying logic andsocial effects? 
As British legal theorists like to put it, individual property rights are held,notionally at least, ‘against the whole world’. If you own a car, you have theright to prevent anyone in the entire world from entering or using it. (If youthink about it, this is the only right you have in your car that’s reallyabsolute. Almost anything else you can do with a car is strictly regulated:where and how you can drive it, park it, and so forth. But you can keepabsolutely anyone else in the world from getting inside it.) In this case theobject is set apart, fenced about by invisible or visible barriers – notbecause it is tied to some supernatural being, but because it’s sacred to aspeciﬁc, living human individual. In other respects, the logic is much the same. 
To recognize the close parallels between private property and notions ofthe sacred is also to recognize what is so historically odd about Europeansocial thought. Which is that – quite unlike free societies – we take thisabsolute, sacred quality in private property as a paradigm for all human rights and freedoms. This is what the political scientist C. B. Macphersonmeant by ‘possessive individualism’. Just as every man’s home is his castle,so your right not to be killed, tortured or arbitrarily imprisoned rests on theidea that you own your own body, just as you own your chattels andpossessions, and legally have the right to exclude others from your land, orhouse, or car, and so on.53 As we’ve seen, those who did not share thisparticular European conception of the sacred could indeed be killed,tortured or arbitrarily imprisoned – and, from Amazonia to Oceania, theyoften were.54 

For most Native American societies, this kind of attitude was profoundlyalien. If it applied anywhere at all, then it was only with regard to sacredobjects, or what the anthropologist Robert Lowie termed ‘sacra’ when hepointed out long ago that many of the most important forms of indigenousproperty were immaterial or incorporeal: magic formulae, stories, medicalknowledge, the right to perform a certain dance, or stitch a certain patternon one’s mantle. It was often the case that weapons, tools and eventerritories used to hunt game were freely shared – but the esoteric powers tosafeguard the reproduction of game from one season to the next, or ensureluck in the chase, were individually owned and jealously guarded.55 

Quite often, sacra have both material and immaterial elements; as amongthe Kwakiutl, where ownership of an heirloom wooden feast-dish alsoconveyed the right to gather berries on a certain stretch of land with whichto ﬁll it; which in turn afforded its owner the right to present those berrieswhile singing a certain song at a certain feast, and so forth.56 Such forms of sacred property are endlessly complex and variable. Among Plains societiesof North America, for instance, sacred bundles (which normally includednot only physical objects but accompanying dances, rituals and songs) wereoften the only objects in that society to be treated as private property: notjust owned exclusively by individuals, but also inherited, bought and sold.57 

Often, the true ‘owners’ of land or other natural resources were said to begods or spirits; mortal humans are merely squatters, poachers, or at bestcaretakers. People variously adopted a predatory attitude to resources – as with hunters, who appropriate what really belongs to the gods – or that of acaretaker (where one is only the ‘owner’ or ‘master’ of a village, or men’shouse, or stretch of territory if one is ultimately responsible for maintainingand looking after it). Sometimes these attitudes coexist, as in Amazonia,where the paradigm for ownership (or ‘mastery’ – it’s always the sameword) involves capturing wild animals and then adopting them as pets; thatis, precisely the point where violent appropriation of the natural world turnsinto nurture or ‘taking care’.58 

It is not unusual for ethnographers working with indigenous Amazoniansocieties to discover that almost everything around them has an owner, orcould potentially be owned, from lakes and mountains to cultivars, lianagroves and animals. As ethnographers also note, such ownership alwayscarries a double meaning of domination and care. To be without an owner isto be exposed, unprotected.59 In what anthropologists refer to as totemicsystems, of the kind we discussed for Australia and North America, theresponsibility of care takes on a particularly extreme form. Each humanclan is said to ‘own’ a certain species of animal – thus making them the‘Bear clan’, ‘Elk clan’, ‘Eagle clan’ and so forth – but what this means isprecisely that members of that clan cannot hunt, kill, harm or otherwiseconsume animals of that species. In fact, they are expected to take part inrituals that promote its existence and make it ﬂourish.
What makes the Roman Law conception of property – the basis of almostall legal systems today – unique is that the responsibility to care and shareis reduced to a minimum, or even eliminated entirely. In Roman Law thereare three basic rights relating to possession: usus (the right to use), fructus (the right to enjoy the products of a property, for instance the fruit of a tree),and abusus (the right to damage or destroy). If one has only the ﬁrst tworights this is referred to as usufruct, and is not considered true possessionunder the law. The deﬁning feature of true legal property, then, is that onehas the option of not taking care of it, or even destroying it at will. 
We are now, ﬁnally, approaching a general conclusion about the coming ofprivate property, which can be illustrated by one last and especially strikingexample: the famous initiation rituals of the Australian Western Desert.Here adult males of each clan act as guardians or custodians of particularterritories. There are certain sacra, known as churinga or tsurinja by theAranda, which are relics of ancestors who effectively created each clan’s territory in ancient times. Mostly, they are smoothed pieces of wood orstone inscribed with a totemic emblem. The same objects could alsoembody legal title to those lands. Émile Durkheim considered them the veryarchetype of the sacred: things set apart from the ordinary world andaccorded pious devotion; effectively, the ‘Holy Ark of the clan’.60 

During periodic rites of initiation, new cohorts of male Aranda youths aretaught about the history of the land and the nature of its resources. They arealso charged with the responsibility of caring for it, which in particularmeans the duty to maintain churinga and the sacred sites associated with them, which only the initiated should properly know about in the ﬁrst place.As observed by T. G. H. Strehlow – an anthropologist and the son of aLutheran missionary, who spent many years among the Aranda in the earlytwentieth century, becoming the foremost non-Aranda authority on thistopic – the weight of duty is conveyed through terror, torture andmutilation: 
One or two months after the novice has submitted to circumcision,there follows the second principal initiation rite, that of sub-incision… The novice has now undergone all the requisite physicaloperations which have been designed to make him worthy of aman’s estate, and he has learned to obey the commands of the oldmen implicitly. His newly-found blind obedience stands in strikingcontrast to the unbridled insolence and general unruliness of temperwhich characterized his behaviour in the days of his childhood.Native children are usually spoiled by their parents. Mothers gratifyevery whim of their offspring, and fathers do not bother about anydisciplinary measures. The deliberate cruelty with which thetraditional initiation rites are carried out at a later age is carefullycalculated to punish insolent and lawless boys for their pastimpudence and to train them into obedient, dutiful ‘citizens’ whowill obey their elders without a murmur, and be ﬁt heirs to theancient sacred traditions of their clan.61 

Here is another, painfully clear example of how behaviour observed inritual contexts takes exactly the opposite form to the free and equalrelations that prevail in ordinary life. It is only within such contexts that 
exclusive (sacred) forms of property exist, strict and top-down hierarchiesare enforced, and where orders given are dutifully obeyed.62 

Looking back again to prehistory, it is – as we’ve already noted –impossible to know precisely which forms of property or ownership existedat places like Göbekli Tepe, Poverty Point, Sannai Maruyama orStonehenge, any more than we can know if regalia buried with the ‘princes’of the Upper Palaeolithic were their personal possessions. What we cannow suggest, in light of these wider considerations, is that such carefullyco-ordinated ritual theatres, often laid out with geometrical precision, wereexactly the kinds of places where exclusive claims to rights over property –together with strict demands for unquestioning obedience – were likely tobe made, among otherwise free people. If private property has an ‘origin’, itis as old as the idea of the sacred, which is likely as old as humanity itself.The pertinent question to ask is not so much when this happened, as how iteventually came to order so many other aspects of human affairs. 

5 

Many Seasons Ago 
Why Canadian foragers kept slaves and their Californian neighboursdidn’t; or, the problem with ‘modes of production’ 
Our world as it existed just before the dawn of agriculture was anything buta world of roving hunter-gatherer bands. It was marked, in many places, bysedentary villages and towns, some by then already ancient, as well asmonumental sanctuaries and stockpiled wealth, much of it the work of ritualspecialists, highly skilled artisans and architects.
When considering the broad sweep of history, most scholars eithercompletely ignore this pre-agricultural world or write it off as some kind ofstrange anomaly: a false start to civilization. Palaeolithic hunters andMesolithic ﬁsherfolk may have buried their dead like aristocracy, but the‘origins’ of class stratiﬁcation are still sought in much later periods.Louisiana’s Poverty Point may have had the dimensions and at least somefunctions of an ancient city, but it is absent from most histories of NorthAmerican urbanism, let alone urbanism in general; just as 10,000 years ofJapanese civilization is sometimes written off as a prelude to the coming ofrice-farming and metallurgy. Even the Calusa of Florida Keys are oftenreferred to as an ‘incipient chiefdom’. What’s deemed important is not whatthey were, but the fact that they could be on the brink of turning intosomething else: a ‘proper’ kingdom, presumably, whose subjects paidtribute in crops.
This peculiar habit of thought requires us to treat whole populations of‘complex hunter-gatherers’ either as deviants, who took some kind ofdiversion from the evolutionary highway, or as lingering on the cusp of an‘Agricultural Revolution’ that never quite took place. It’s bad enough whenthis is applied to a people like the Calusa, who were after all relativelysmall in number, living in complicated historical circumstances. Yet the same logic is regularly applied to the history of entire indigenouspopulations along the Paciﬁc Coast of North America, in a territory runningfrom present-day greater Los Angeles to the surroundings of Vancouver.
When Christopher Columbus set sail from Palos de la Frontera in 1492,these lands were home to hundreds of thousands, perhaps even millions ofinhabitants.1 They were foragers, but about as different from the Hadza,Mbuti or !Kung as one can imagine. Living in an unusually bounteousenvironment, often occupying villages year-round, the indigenous peoplesof California, for example, were notorious for their industry and, in manycases, near-obsession with the accumulation of wealth. Archaeologists oftencharacterize their techniques of land management as a kind of incipientagriculture; some even use Aboriginal California as a model for what theprehistoric inhabitants of the Fertile Crescent – who ﬁrst begandomesticating wheat and barley 10,000 years ago in the Middle East –might have been like.
To be fair to the archaeologists, it’s an obvious comparison, sinceecologically California – with its ‘Mediterranean’ climate, exceptionallyfertile soils and tight juxtaposition of micro-environments (deserts, forests,valleys, coastlands and mountains) – is remarkably similar to the westernﬂank of the Middle East (the area, say, from modern Gaza or Amman northto Beirut and Damascus). On the other hand, a comparison with theinventors of farming makes little sense from the perspective of indigenousCalifornians, who could hardly have failed to notice the nearby presence –particularly among their Southwest neighbours – of tropical crops,including maize corn, which ﬁrst arrived there from Mesoamerica around4,000 years ago.2 While the free peoples of North America’s easternseaboard nearly all adopted at least some food crops, those of the WestCoast uniformly rejected them. Indigenous peoples of California were notpre-agricultural. If anything, they were anti-agricultural. 
IN WHICH WE FIRST CONSIDER THE QUESTION OFCULTURAL DIFFERENTIATION 
The systematic nature of this rejection of agriculture is a fascinatingphenomenon in itself. Most who attempt to explain it nowadays appealalmost entirely to environmental factors: relying on acorns or pine nuts asone’s staple in California, or aquatic resources further north, was simply ecologically more efﬁcient than the maize agriculture adopted in other partsof North America. No doubt this was true on the whole, but in an areaspanning several thousand miles and a wide variety of different ecosystems,it seems unlikely that there was not a single region where maize cultivationwould have been advantageous. And if efﬁciency was the onlyconsideration, one would have to imagine there were some cultigens –beans, squash, pumpkins, watermelons, any one of an endless variety ofleafy vegetables – that someone, somewhere along the coast might havefound worth adopting.
The systematic rejection of all domesticated foodstuffs is even more striking when one realizes that many Californians and Northwest Coastpeoples did plant and grow tobacco, as well as other plants – such asspringbank clover and Paciﬁc silverweed – which they used for ritualpurposes, or as luxuries consumed only at special feasts.3 In other words,they were perfectly familiar with the techniques for planting and tending tocultigens. Yet they comprehensively rejected the idea of planting everydayfoodstuffs or treating crops as staples.
One reason this rejection is signiﬁcant is that it offers a clue as to howone might answer the much broader question we posed – but then leftdangling – at the beginning of Chapter Four: what is it that causes human beings to spend so much effort trying to demonstrate that they are differentfrom their neighbours? Recall how, after the end of the last Ice Age, thearchaeological record is increasingly characterized by ‘culture areas’: thatis, localized populations with their own characteristic styles of clothing,cooking and architecture; and no doubt also their own stories about theorigin of the universe, rules for the marriage of cousins, and so forth. Eversince Mesolithic times, the broad tendency has been for human beings tofurther subdivide, coming up with endless new ways to distinguishthemselves from their neighbours.
It is curious how little anthropologists speculate about why this wholeprocess of subdivision ever happened. It’s usually treated as self-evident, aninescapable fact of human existence. If any explanation is offered, it’sassumed to be an effect of language. Tribes or nations are regularly referredto as ‘ethno-linguistic’ groups; that is, what is really important about themis the fact they share the same language. Those who share the samelanguage are presumed, all other things being equal, also to share the samecustoms, sensibilities and traditions of family life. Languages, in turn, are generally assumed to branch off from one another by something like anatural process.
In this line of reasoning, a key breakthrough was the realization – usuallyattributed to Sir William Jones, a British colonial ofﬁcial stationed inBengal towards the end of the eighteenth century – that Greek, Latin andSanskrit all seem to derive from a common root. Before long, linguists haddetermined that Celtic, Germanic and Slavic languages – as well as Persian,Armenian, Kurdish and more – all belonged to the same ‘Indo-European’family. Others, for instance Semitic, Turkic and East Asian languages, didnot. Studying relationships among these various linguistic groupseventually led to the science of glottochronology: how distinct languagesdiverge from a common source. Since all languages are continuallychanging, and since that change appears to occur at a relatively steady pace,it became possible to reconstruct how and when Turkic languages began toseparate from Mongolic, or the relative temporal distance between Spanishand French, Finnish and Estonian, Hawaiian and Malagasy, and so on. Allthis led to the construction of a series of linguistic family trees, andeventually an attempt – still highly controversial – to trace virtually allEurasian languages to a single hypothetical ancestor called ‘Nostratic’.Nostratic was believed to have existed sometime during the laterPalaeolithic, or even to have been the original phylum from which everyhuman language sprang.
It might seem strange to imagine linguistic drift causing a single idiom toevolve into languages as different as English, Chinese and Apache; but,given the extraordinarily long periods of time being considered here, evenan accretion of tiny generational changes can, it seems, eventuallytransform the vocabulary and sound-structure, even the grammar of alanguage completely.
If cultural differences largely correspond to what happens in language,then distinct human cultures, more generally, would have to be the productof a similar process of gradual drift. As populations migrated or becameotherwise isolated from one another, they formed not only their owncharacteristic languages but their own traditional customs as well. All thisinvolves any number of largely unexamined assumptions – for instance,why is it that languages are always changing to begin with? – but the mainpoint is this. Even if we take such an explanation as a given, it doesn’treally explain what we actually observe on the ground. 
Consider an ethno-linguistic map of northern California in the earlytwentieth century, set into a larger map of North American ‘culture areas’ asdeﬁned by ethnologists at that time:
What we are presented with here is a collection of people with broadlysimilar cultural practices, but speaking a jumble of languages, many drawnfrom entirely different language families – as distant from one another as,say, Arabic, Tamil and Portuguese. All these groups shared broadsimilarities: in terms of how they went about gathering and processingfoodstuffs; in their most important religious rituals; in the organization oftheir political life, and so on. But there were also subtle or not-so-subtledifferences between them, so that members of each group saw themselvesas distinct kinds of people: Yurok, Hupa, Karok and so forth.
These local identities did map on to linguistic differences. However,neighbouring peoples speaking languages drawn from different families(Athabascan, Na-Dene, Uto-Aztecan and so on) actually had far more incommon with each other, in almost every other way, than they did withspeakers of languages from the same linguistic family living in other partsof North America. The same can be said of the First Nations of the Canadian Northwest Coast, who also speak a variety of unrelatedlanguages, but in other ways resemble one another far more closely thanthey do speakers of the same languages from outside the Northwest Coast,including in California.
Of course, European colonization had a profound and catastrophic impacton the distribution of Native American peoples, but what we are seeing herealso reﬂects a deeper continuity of culture-historical development, a processthat tended to occur at various points in human history, when modern nationstates were not around to order populations into neat ethno-linguisticgroups. Arguably, the very idea that the world is divided into suchhomogeneous units, each with its own history, is largely a product of themodern nation state, and the desire of each to claim for itself a deepterritorial lineage. At the very least, we should think twice before projectingsuch uniformities back in time, on to remote periods of human history forwhich no direct evidence of language distributions even exists. 


In this chapter, we want to explore what actually did drive processes ofcultural subdivision for the greater part of human history. Such processesare crucial to understanding how human freedoms, once taken for granted,eventually came to be lost. In doing this, we’ll focus on the history of thosenon-agricultural peoples who inhabited the western coast of North America.As their refusal of agriculture implies, these processes were likely far moreself-conscious than scholars usually imagine. In some cases, as we’ll see,they appear to have involved explicit reﬂection and argument about thenature of freedom itself. 
WHERE WE CONSIDER THE WILDLY INADEQUATE,SOMETIMES OFFENSIVE BUT OCCASIONALLY SUGGESTIVE WAYS IN WHICH THE QUESTION OF ‘CULTURE AREAS’ HASBEEN BROACHED BEFORE 
How did earlier generations of scholars describe these regional clusters ofsocieties? The term most commonly used, up until the middle of thetwentieth century, was ‘culture areas’ (or ‘culture circles’), a concept which,nowadays, has either been forgotten or fallen into disrepute.
The notion of ‘culture areas’ ﬁrst emerged in the last decades of thenineteenth century and the ﬁrst of the twentieth. Since the Renaissance,human history had been seen largely as the story of great migrations:humans, having fallen from grace, wandering ever more distant from theGarden of Eden. Family trees showing the dispersal of Indo-European orSemitic languages did nothing to discourage this kind of thinking. But thenotion of human progress pulled in the exact opposite direction: itencouraged researchers to imagine ‘primitive’ peoples as tiny, isolatedcommunities, cut off from each other and the larger world. This, of course,is what made it possible to treat them as specimens of earlier stages ofhuman development in the ﬁrst place: if everyone were in regular contactwith each other, this sort of evolutionist analysis wouldn’t really work.4 

The notion of ‘culture areas’, by contrast, came largely out of museums,and particularly in North America. Curators organizing art and artefacts had to decide whether to arrange their material so as to illustrate theories aboutthe different stages of human adaptation (Lower Savagery, Upper Savagery,Lower Barbarism and so on); or so as to trace the history of ancientmigrations, whether real or imagined (in the American context this wouldmean organizing them by language family, then assumed, for no particularlygood reason, to correspond with ‘racial’ stocks); or whether to simplyorganize them into regional clusters.5 Though the last of these seemedmost arbitrary, it proved to be the one that really worked best. Art andtechnology from different Eastern Woodlands tribes, for instance, appearedto have much more in common than material from, say, all speakers ofAthabascan languages; or all people who relied mainly on ﬁshing, orcultivated maize. This method turned out to work quite well forarchaeological material too, with prehistorians like the Australian V.Gordon Childe observing similar patterns among Neolithic villagesstretching across central Europe, forming regional clusters of evidencerelating to domestic life, art and ritual.
At ﬁrst, the most prominent exponent of the culture area approach wasFranz Boas. Boas, it will be recalled, was a transplanted Germanethnologist6 who in 1899 landed a chair in anthropology at New York’sColumbia University. He also gained a position in charge of ethnographiccollections at the American Museum of Natural History, where his hallsdedicated to the Eastern Woodlands and Northwest Coast still remain popular attractions over a century later. Boas’s student and successor at themuseum, Clark Wissler, tried to systematize his ideas by dividing theAmericas as a whole, from Newfoundland to Tierra del Fuego, into ﬁfteendifferent regional systems, each with its own characteristic customs,aesthetic styles, ways of obtaining and preparing food, and forms of socialorganization. Before long, other ethnologists were undertaking similarprojects, mapping out regions from Europe to Oceania.
Boas was a staunch anti-racist. As a German Jew, he was particularlytroubled by the way the American obsession with race and eugenics wasbeing taken up in his own mother country.7 When Wissler began toembrace certain eugenicist ideas, the pair had a bitter falling-out. But theoriginal impetus for the culture area concept was precisely to ﬁnd a way oftalking about human history which avoided ranking populations into higheror lower on any grounds, whether claiming some were of superior geneticstock or had reached a more advanced level of moral and technological evolution. Instead, Boas and his students proposed that anthropologistsreconstruct the diffusion of what were then referred to as ‘culture traits’ (ceramics, sweat lodges, the organization of young men into competingwarrior societies), and try to understand why, as Wissler put it, tribes of acertain region came to share ‘the same mesh of culture traits’.8 

This resulted in a peculiar fascination with reconstructing the historicalmovement, or ‘diffusion’, of speciﬁc customs and ideas. Flipping throughanthropological journals from the turn of the twentieth century, you ﬁndthat the majority of the essays in a given number are of this type. They paidspecial attention to contemporary games and musical instruments used, say,in various different parts of Africa, or of Oceania – perhaps because, of allculture traits, these seemed least affected by practical considerations orconstraints, and their distribution might therefore shed light on historicalpatterns of contact and inﬂuence. One especially lively area of debateconcerned the string-ﬁgure game known as cat’s cradles. During the TorresStraits expedition of 1898, Professors Alfred Haddon and W. H. R. Rivers,then leading ﬁgures in British anthropology, developed a uniform method ofdiagramming string ﬁgures used in children’s play, which made it possiblefor systematic comparisons to be made. Before long, rival theoriesconcerning the origins and diffusion of particular patterns of string ﬁgures(the Palm Tree, the Bagobo Diamond …) among different societies werebeing hotly contested in the pages of the Journal of the RoyalAnthropological Society and similar erudite venues.9 

The obvious questions, then, were: why culture traits cluster as they do;and how they come to be ‘enmeshed’ in regional patterns to begin with.Boas himself was convinced that while geography might have deﬁned thecirculation of ideas within particular regions (mountains and desertsforming natural barriers), what happened inside those regions was,effectively, down to historical accident. Others hypothesized about thepredominating ethos or form of organization within a given region; ordreamed of creating a kind of natural science that might one day explain oreven predict the ebb and ﬂow of styles, habits and social forms. Almost noone reads this literature any more. Like the cat’s cradles, today it’sconsidered at best an amusing token of the discipline’s childhood.
Still, important issues were raised here: issues which no one to this dayhas really been able to address. For example, why are the peoples ofCalifornia so similar to one another, and so different from neighbouring peoples of the American Southwest, or the Canadian Northwest Coast?Perhaps the most insightful contribution came from Marcel Mauss, whotackled the notion of ‘culture areas’ in a series of essays on nationalism andcivilization written between 1910 and 1930.10 Mauss thought the idea ofcultural ‘diffusion’ was mostly nonsense; not for the reasons mostanthropologists do now (that it’s pointless and uninteresting),11 but because he felt it was based on a false assumption: that the movement of people,technologies and ideas was somehow unusual.
The exact opposite was true, Mauss argued. People in past times, hewrote, appear to have travelled a great deal – more than they do today – andit’s simply impossible to imagine that anyone back then would have beenunaware of the existence of basketry, feather pillows, or the wheel if suchobjects were regularly employed a month or two’s journey away; the samecould presumably be said of ancestor cults or syncopated drum rhythms.Mauss went further. He was convinced the entire Paciﬁc Rim had once been a single realm of cultural exchange, with voyagers criss-crossing it atregular intervals. He too was interested in the distribution of games acrossthe entire region. Once, he taught a college course called ‘On the greasypole, the ball play, and other games on the periphery of the Paciﬁc Ocean’,his premise being that, at least when it came to games, all lands borderingthe Paciﬁc – from Japan to New Zealand to California – could be treated,effectively, as a single culture area.12 Legend has it that when Mauss,visiting New York’s American Museum of Natural History, was shown thefamous Kwakiutl war canoe in Boas’s Northwest Coast wing, his ﬁrstreaction was to say that now he knew precisely what ancient China musthave looked like. 
Though Mauss overstated his case, his exaggeration nonetheless led himto reframe the entire question of ‘culture areas’ in an intriguing way.13 For if everyone was broadly aware of what surrounding people were up to, andif knowledge of foreign customs, arts and technologies was widespread, orat least easily available, then the question becomes not why certain culturetraits spread, but why other culture traits didn’t. The answer, Mauss felt, isthat this is precisely how cultures deﬁne themselves against theirneighbours. Cultures were, effectively, structures of refusal. Chinese arepeople who use chopsticks, but not knives and forks; Thai are people whouse spoons, but not chopsticks, and so forth. It’s easy enough to see howthis could be true of aesthetics – styles of art, music or table manners – but surprisingly, Mauss found, it extended even to technologies which heldobvious adaptive or utilitarian beneﬁts. He was intrigued, for example, bythe fact that Athabascans in Alaska steadfastly refused to adopt Inuitkayaks, despite these being self-evidently more suited to the environmentthan their own boats. Inuit, for their part, refused to adopt Athabascansnowshoes. 
What was true of particular cultures was equally true of culture areas; or,as Mauss preferred, ‘civilizations’. Since almost any existing style, form ortechnique has always been potentially available to almost anyone, these toomust always have come about through some such combination ofborrowing and refusal. Crucially, Mauss noted, this process tends to bequite self-conscious. He especially liked to evoke the example of debates inChinese courts about the adoption of foreign styles and customs, such as theremarkable argument put forward by a king of the Zhou Dynasty to hisadvisors and great feudal vassals, who were refusing to wear the Hunnish(Manchu) dress and to ride horses instead of driving chariots: hepainstakingly tried to show them the difference between rites and customs,between the arts and fashion. ‘Societies’, wrote Mauss, ‘live by borrowingfrom each other, but they deﬁne themselves rather by the refusal ofborrowing than by its acceptance.’14 

Nor are such reﬂections limited to what historians think of as ‘high’ (thatis, literate) civilizations. Inuit did not simply react with instinctual revulsionwhen they ﬁrst encountered someone wearing snowshoes, and then refusedto change their minds. They reﬂected on what adopting, or not adopting,snowshoes might say about the kind of people they considered themselvesto be. In fact, Mauss concluded, it is precisely in comparing themselveswith their neighbours that people come to think of themselves as distinct groups.
Framed in this way, the question of how ‘culture areas’ formed isnecessarily a political one. It raises the possibility that decisions such aswhether or not to adopt agriculture weren’t just calculations of caloricadvantage or matters of random cultural taste, but also reﬂected questionsabout values, about what humans really are (and consider themselves to be),and how they should properly relate to one another. Just the kinds of issues,in fact, which our own post-Enlightenment intellectual tradition tends toexpress through terms like freedom, responsibility, authority, equality,solidarity and justice. 
IN WHICH WE APPLY MAUSS’S INSIGHT TO THE PACIFIC COAST AND CONSIDER WHY WALTER GOLDSCHMIDT’S DESCRIPTION OF ABORIGINAL CALIFORNIANS AS ‘PROTESTANT FORAGERS’, WHILE IN MANY WAYS ABSURD,STILL HAS SOMETHING TO TELL US 
Let us return, then, to the Paciﬁc. Since around the start of the twentiethcentury, anthropologists have divided the indigenous inhabitants of NorthAmerica’s western littoral into two broad culture areas: ‘California’ and the ‘Northwest Coast’. Before the nineteenth century, when the effects of thefur trade and then the Gold Rush wreaked havoc on indigenous groups andmany were exterminated, these populations formed a continuous chain offoraging societies extending through much of the West Coast: at that time,perhaps the largest continuous distribution of foraging peoples in the world.If nothing else, it was a highly efﬁcient way of life; both the NorthwestCoast peoples and those of California maintained higher densities ofpopulation than, say, maize, beans and squash farmers of the nearby GreatBasin and American Southwest. 
In other ways, the northern and southern zones were profoundly different,both ecologically and culturally. The peoples of the Canadian NorthwestCoast relied heavily on ﬁshing, and particularly the harvesting ofanadromous ﬁsh such as salmon and eulachon, which migrate upriver fromthe sea to spawn; as well as a variety of marine mammals, terrestrial plantsand game resources. As we saw a couple of chapters ago, these groupsdivided their year between very large coastal winter villages, holdingceremonies of great complexity, and, in spring and summer, smaller socialunits that were more pragmatically focused on the provision of food. Expertwoodworkers, they also transformed the local conifers (ﬁr, spruce, redwood,yew and cedar) into a dazzling material culture of carved and paintedmasks, containers, tribal crests, totem poles, richly decorated houses andcanoes which ranks among the world’s most striking artistic traditions.
Aboriginal societies in California, to the south, occupied one of theworld’s most diverse habitats. They made use of a staggering variety ofterrestrial resources, which they managed by careful techniques of burning,clearing and pruning. The region’s ‘Mediterranean’ climate and tightlycompressed topography of mountains, deserts, foothills, river valleys andcoastlines made for a rich assortment of local ﬂora and fauna, exchanged at inter-tribal trade fairs. Most Californians were proﬁcient ﬁshers andhunters, but many also followed an ancient reliance on tree crops –especially nuts and acorns – as staple foods. Their artistic traditions differedfrom those of the Northwest Coast. House exteriors were generally plainand simple. There was almost nothing similar to the Northwest Coast masksor monumental sculptures that so delight museum curators; rather, aestheticactivity focused on the weaving of highly patterned baskets used for storingand serving food.15 

There was a further important difference between these two extensivegroupings of societies, one that for some reason is far less remarked on byscholars today. From the Klamath River northwards, there existed societiesdominated by warrior aristocracies engaged in frequent inter-group raidingand in which, traditionally, a signiﬁcant portion of the population hadconsisted of chattel slaves. This apparently had been true as long as anyoneliving there could remember. But none of this was the case further south.How exactly did this happen? How did a boundary emerge between oneextended ‘family’ of foraging societies that habitually raided each other forslaves, and another that did not keep slaves at all?
You might think there would be a lively debate about this amongscholars, but in fact there isn’t. Instead, most treat the differences asinsigniﬁcant, preferring to lump all Californian and Northwest Coastsocieties together in a single category of ‘afﬂuent foragers’ or ‘complexhunter-gatherers’.16 If differences between them are considered at all, theyare usually understood as mechanical responses to their contrasting modesof subsistence: aquatic (ﬁsh-based) economies, it’s argued, simply tended tofoster warlike societies, just as terrestrial (acorn-based) foraging economiessomehow did not.17 We will shortly consider the merits and limitations ofsuch recent arguments, but ﬁrst it is useful to turn back to some of theethnographic work undertaken by earlier generations.
Some of the most striking research about the indigenous peoples ofCalifornia was done by the twentieth-century anthropologist WalterGoldschmidt. One of his key writings, unobtrusively entitled ‘anethnological contribution to the sociology of knowledge’, was concernedwith the Yurok and other related groups who inhabited the northwesterncorner of California, just south of the mountain ranges where Oregonbegins.18 For Goldschmidt and members of his anthropological circle, theYurok were famous for the central role that money – which took the form of white dentalium shells arranged on strings, and headbands made of brightred woodpecker scalps – played in every aspect of their social lives.
It’s worth mentioning here that settlers in different parts of NorthAmerica referred to a whole variety of things as ‘Indian money’. Oftenthese were shell beads or actual shells. But in almost every case, the term islargely a projection of European categories on to objects that look likemoney, but really aren’t. Probably the most famous of these, wampum, dideventually come to be used as a trade currency in transactions betweensettlers and indigenous peoples of the Northeast, and was even accepted ascurrency in several American states for transactions between settlers (inMassachusetts and New York, for instance, wampum was legal tender inshops). In dealings between indigenous people, however, it was almostnever used to buy or sell anything. Rather, it was employed to pay ﬁnes,and as a way of forming and remembering compacts and agreements. Thiswas true in California as well. But in California, unusually, money alsoseems to have been used in more or less the way we expect money to havebeen used: for purchases, rentals and loans. In California in general, and itsnorthwest corner in particular, the central role of money in indigenoussocieties was combined with a cultural emphasis on thrift and simplicity, adisapproval of wasteful pleasures, and a gloriﬁcation of work that –according to Goldschmidt – bore an uncanny resemblance to the Puritanattitudes described by Max Weber in his famous 1905 essay, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.
This analogy might seem a bit of a stretch, and in many ways it was. Butit’s important to understand the comparison that Goldschmidt was actuallymaking. Weber’s essay, familiar to just about anyone who’s ever taken asocial science course, is often misunderstood. Weber was trying to answer avery speciﬁc question: why capitalism emerged in western Europe, and notelsewhere. Capitalism, as he deﬁned it, was itself a kind of moralimperative. Almost everywhere in the world, he noted, and certainly inChina, India and the Islamic world, one found commerce, wealthymerchants and people who might justly be referred to as ‘capitalists’. Butalmost everywhere, anyone who acquired an enormous fortune wouldeventually cash in their chips. They would either buy themselves a palaceand enjoy life, or come under enormous moral pressure from theircommunity to spend their proﬁts on religious or public works, or boozypopular festivities (usually they did a bit of both). 
Capitalism, on the other hand, involved constant reinvestment, turningone’s wealth into an engine for creating ever more wealth, increasingproduction, expanding operations, and so forth. But imagine, Webersuggested, being the very ﬁrst person in one’s community to act this way.To do so would have meant defying all social expectations, to be utterlydespised by almost all your neighbours – who would, increasingly, alsobecome your employees. Anyone capable of acting in such a deﬁantlysingle-minded manner, Weber observed, would ‘have to be some sort ofhero’. This, he said, is the reason why it took a Puritanical strain ofChristianity, like Calvinism, to make capitalism possible. Puritans not onlybelieved almost anything they could spend their proﬁts on was sinful; butalso, joining a Puritan congregation meant one had a moral communitywhose support would allow one to endure the hostility of one’s hell-boundneighbours.
Obviously, none of this was true in an eighteenth-century Yurok village.Aboriginal Californians did not hire one another as wage labourers, lendmoney at interest, or invest the proﬁts of commercial ventures to expandproduction. There were no ‘capitalists’ in the literal sense. What there was,however, was a remarkable cultural emphasis on private property. AsGoldschmidt notes, all property, whether natural resources, money or itemsof wealth, was ‘privately (and for the most part individually) owned’,including ﬁshing, hunting and gathering grounds. Individual ownership wascomplete, with full rights of alienation. Such a highly developed concept ofproperty, Goldschmidt observed, requires the use of money, such that inNorthwest California ‘money buys everything – wealth, resources, food,honor and wives.’19 

This very unusual property regime corresponded to a broad ethos, whichGoldschmidt compared to Weber’s ‘spirit’ of capitalism (though, one mightobject, it corresponds more to how capitalists like to imagine the world thanto how capitalism actually works). The Yurok were what we’ve called‘possessive individualists’. They took it for granted that we are all bornequal, and that it is up to each of us to make something of ourselves throughself-discipline, self-denial and hard work. What’s more, this ethos appearsto have been largely applied in practice.
As we’ve seen, the indigenous peoples of the Northwest Coast were justas industrious as those of California, and in both cases those whoaccumulated wealth were expected to give much of it away by sponsoring collective festivals. The underlying ethos, however, could not have beenmore different. Where the wealthy Yurok were expected to be modest,Kwakiutl chiefs were boastful and vainglorious; so much so that oneanthropologist compared them to paranoid schizophrenics. Where wealthyYurok made little of their ancestry, Northwest Coast households had muchin common with the noble houses and dynastic estates of medieval Europe,in which a class of nobles jockeyed for position within ranks of hereditaryprivilege, staging dazzling banquets to enhance their reputations and securetheir claims to honoriﬁc titles and heirloom treasures stretching back to thebeginning of time.20 

It’s hard to imagine that the existence of such striking cultural differencesbetween neighbouring populations could be completely coincidental, butit’s also extremely difﬁcult to ﬁnd any studies that even begin to address thequestion of how this contrast came about.21 Is it possible to see indigenousCalifornians and peoples of the Northwest Coast as deﬁning themselvesagainst each other, rather in the manner that Californians and New Yorkersdo today? If so, then how much of their way of life can we really explain asbeing motivated by a desire to be unlike other groups of people? Here, weneed to bring back our earlier discussion of schismogenesis, which weintroduced to help make sense of the intellectual encounter betweenseventeenth-century French colonists and the Wendat people of NorthAmerica’s Eastern Woodlands. 
Schismogenesis, you’ll recall, describes how societies in contact witheach other end up joined within a common system of differences, even asthey attempt to distinguish themselves from one another. Perhaps the classichistorical example (in both senses of the term ‘classic’) would be theancient Greek city-states of Athens and Sparta, in the ﬁfth century BC. As Marshall Sahlins puts it: 
Dynamically interconnected, they were then reciprocally constituted
… Athens was to Sparta as sea to land, cosmopolitan to xenophobic,
commercial to autarkic, luxurious to frugal, democratic to
oligarchic, urban to villageois, autochthonous to immigrant,
logomanic to laconic: one cannot ﬁnish enumerating the
dichotomies … Athens and Sparta were antitypes.22 

Each society performs a mirror image of the other. In doing so, it becomesan indispensable alter ego, the necessary and ever-present example of whatone should never wish to be. Might a similar logic apply to the history offoraging societies in California and on the Northwest Coast? 
WHERE WE MAKE A CASE FOR SCHISMOGENESIS BETWEEN ‘PROTESTANT FORAGERS’ AND ‘FISHER KINGS’ 
Let’s look more closely at what might be described, in Weber’s sense, as the‘spirit’ of northern Californian foragers. At root, it was a series of ethicalimperatives, in Goldschmidt’s words: ‘the moral demand to work and byextension pursuit of gain; the moral demand of self-denial; and theindividuation of moral responsibility’.23 Bound up in this was a passion forindividual autonomy as absolute as that of any Kalahari Bushman – even ifit took a strikingly different form. Yurok men scrupulously avoided beingplaced in a situation of debt or ongoing obligation to anyone else. Even thecollective management of resources was frowned upon; foraging groundswere individually owned and could be rented out in times of shortfall.
Property was sacred, and not only in the legal sense that poachers couldbe shot. It also had a spiritual value. Yurok men would often spend longhours meditating on money, while the highest objects of wealth – precioushides and obsidian blades displayed only at festivals – were the ultimatesacra. Yurok struck outsiders as puritanical in a literal sense as well: asGoldschmidt reports, ambitious Yurok men were ‘exhorted to abstain fromany kind of indulgence – eating, sexual gratiﬁcation, play or sloth’. Bigeaters were considered ‘vulgar’. Young men and women were lectured onthe need to eat slowly and modestly, to keep their bodies slim and lithe.Wealthy Yurok men would gather every day in sweat lodges, where analmost daily test of these ascetic values was the need to crawl headﬁrstthrough a tiny aperture that no overweight body could possibly enter.Repasts were kept bland and spartan, decoration simple, dancing modestand restrained. There were no inherited ranks or titles. Even those who did inherit wealth continued to emphasize their personal hard work, frugalityand achievement; and while the rich were expected to be generous towardsthe less fortunate and look after their own lands and possessions,responsibilities for sharing and caring were modest in comparison withforaging societies almost anywhere else. 
Northwest Coast societies, in contrast, became notorious among outsideobservers for the delight they took in displays of excess. They were bestknown to European ethnologists for the festivals called potlatch, usuallyheld by aristocrats acceding to some new noble title (nobles would oftenaccumulate many of these over the course of a lifetime). In these feasts theysought to display their grandeur and contempt for ordinary worldlypossessions by performing magniﬁcent feats of generosity, overwhelmingtheir rivals with gallons of candleﬁsh oil, berries and quantities of fatty andgreasy ﬁsh. Such feasts were scenes of dramatic contests, sometimesculminating in the ostentatious destruction of heirloom copper shields andother treasures, just as in the early period of colonial contact, around theturn of the nineteenth century, they sometimes culminated in the sacriﬁcialkilling of slaves. Each treasure was unique; there was nothing thatresembled money. Potlatch was an occasion for gluttony and indulgence,‘grease feasts’ designed to leave the body shiny and fat. Nobles oftencompared themselves to mountains, with the gifts they bestowed rolling offthem like boulders, to ﬂatten and crush their rivals.
The Northwest Coast group we know best are the Kwakwaka’wakw(Kwakiutl), among whom Boas conducted ﬁeldwork. They became famousfor the exuberant ornamentation of their art – their love of masks within masks – and the theatrical stage effects employed in their rituals, includingfake blood, trap doors and violent clown-police. All the surroundingsocieties – including the Nootka, Haida and Tsimshian – appear to haveshared the same broad ethos: similarly dazzling material cultures andperformances could be found all the way from Alaska south to the area ofWashington State. They also shared the same basic social structure, withhereditary ranks of nobles, commoners and slaves. Throughout this entireregion, a 1,500-mile strip of land from the Copper River delta to CapeMendocino, inter-group raiding for slaves was endemic, and had been for aslong as anyone could recall.
In all these societies of the Northwest Coast, nobles alone enjoyed theritual prerogative to engage with guardian spirits, who conferred access toaristocratic titles, and the right to keep the slaves captured in raids.Commoners, including brilliant artists and craftspeople, were largely free todecide which noble house they wished to align themselves with; chiefs viedfor their allegiance by sponsoring feasts, entertainment and vicariousparticipation in their heroic adventures. ‘Take good care of your people,’ 
went the elder’s advice to a young Nuu-chah-nulth (Nootka) chief. ‘If yourpeople don’t like you, you’re nothing.’24 

In many ways, the behaviour of Northwest Coast aristocrats resemblesthat of Maﬁa dons, with their strict codes of honour and patronage relations;or what sociologists speak of as ‘court societies’ – the sort of arrangementone might expect in, say, feudal Sicily, from which the Maﬁa derived manyof its cultural codes.25 But this is emphatically not what we are taught toexpect among foragers. Granted, the followers of any one of these ‘ﬁsher.kings’ rarely numbered more than 100 or 200 people, not much larger thanthe size of a Californian village; in neither the Northwest Coast nor theCalifornian culture area were there overarching political, economic orreligious organizations of any kind. But within the tiny communities thatdid exist, entirely different principles of social life applied. 
All this begins to make the anthropologists’ habit of lumping Yuroknotables and Kwakiutl artists together as ‘afﬂuent foragers’ or ‘complexhunter-gatherers’ seem rather silly: the equivalent of saying a Texas oilexecutive and a medieval Egyptian poet were both ‘complexagriculturalists’ because they ate a lot of wheat.
But how do we explain the differences between these two culture areas?Do we start from the institutional structure (the rank system and importanceof potlatch in the Northwest Coast, the role of money and private propertyin California), then try to understand how the prevailing ethos of eachsociety emerges from it? Or did the ethos come ﬁrst – a certain conceptionof the nature of humanity and its role in the cosmos – and did theinstitutional structures emerge from that? Or are both simply effects of adifferent technological adaptation to the environment?
These are fundamental questions about the nature of society. Theoristshave been batting them about for centuries, and probably will be forcenturies to come. To put the matter more technically, we might ask whatultimately determines the shape a society takes: economic factors,organizational imperatives or cultural meanings and ideas? Following in thefootsteps of Mauss, we might also suggest a fourth possibility. Are societiesin effect self-determining, building and reproducing themselves primarilywith reference to each other? 
There’s a lot riding on the answer we give in this particular case. Theindigenous history of the Paciﬁc Coast might not provide a very good model for what the ﬁrst ‘proto-farmers’ in the Fertile Crescent were like,10,000 years ago. But it does shed unique light on other kinds of culturalprocesses, which – as we explored above – have been going on for just aslong, if not longer: whereby certain foraging peoples, in particular timesand places, came to accept permanent inequalities, structures of dominationand the loss of freedoms. 
Let’s now go through the possible explanations, one by one. 
The most striking difference between the indigenous societies of Californiaand the Northwest Coast is the absence, in California, of formal ranks andthe institution of potlatch. The second really follows from the ﬁrst. InCalifornia there were feasts and festivals, to be sure, but since there was notitle system, these lacked almost all the distinctive features of potlatch: the division between ‘high’ and ‘low’ forms of cuisine, the use of rankedseating orders and serving equipment, obligatory eating of oily foods,competitive gifting, self-aggrandizing speeches, or any other publicmanifestations of rivalry between nobles ﬁghting over titular privilege.26 

In many ways, the seasonal gatherings of Californian tribes seem exactlyto reverse the principles of potlatch. Staple rather than luxury foods wereconsumed; ritual dances were playful rather than regimented or menacing,often involving the humorous transgression of social boundaries betweenmen and women, children and elders (they seem to be one of the fewoccasions when the otherwise staid Yurok allowed themselves to have a bit of fun). Valuables such as obsidian blades and deer skins were neversacriﬁced or gifted to enemies as a challenge or insult, but carefullyunwrapped and passed into the trust of temporary ‘dance leaders’, as if tounderline how much their owners wished to avoid drawing undue attentionto themselves.27 

Local headmen in California certainly did beneﬁt by hosting suchoccasions: social connections were made, and an enhanced reputation couldoften mean later opportunities to make money.28 But insofar as feast sponsors could be seen as self-aggrandizing, they themselves went to greatlengths to downplay their roles, and anyway, attributing a secret desire forproﬁt to them seems reductive in the extreme, even rather insulting,considering the actual redistribution of resources that went on inCalifornian trade feasts and ‘deerskin dances’, and their well-documented 
importance in promoting solidarity between groups from neighbouringhamlets.29 

So are we talking about the same basic institution (a ‘redistributivefeast’) carried out in an entirely different spirit, or two entirely differentinstitutions, or even, potlatch and anti-potlatch? How are we to tell? Clearlythe issue is much broader, and touches on the very nature of ‘culture areas’and what actually constitutes a threshold or boundary between them. We arelooking for a key to this problem. It lies in the institution of slavery, which,as we’ve noted, was endemic on the Northwest Coast but correspondinglyabsent south of the Klamath River in California. 
Slaves on the Northwest Coast were hewers of wood and drawers of water, but they were especially involved in the mass harvesting, cleaningand processing of salmon and other anadromous ﬁsh. There’s no consensus,however, on how far back the indigenous practice of slavery actually wentthere. The ﬁrst European accounts of the region in the late eighteenthcentury speak of slaves, and express mild surprise in doing so, since full-ﬂedged chattel slavery was quite unusual in other parts of aboriginal NorthAmerica. These accounts suggest that perhaps a quarter of the indigenousNorthwest Coast population lived in bondage – which is about equivalent toproportions found in the Roman Empire, or classical Athens, or indeed thecotton plantations of the American South. What’s more, slavery on theNorthwest Coast was a hereditary status: if you were a slave, your childrenwere also fated to be so.30 

Given the limitations of our sources, it’s always possible that theseEuropean accounts were describing what was, at the time, a recentinnovation. Current archaeological and ethno-historical research, though,suggests that the institution of slavery goes back a very long way indeed onthe Northwest Coast, many centuries before European ships began dockingat Nootka Sound to trade in otter pelts and blankets. 
CONCERNING THE NATURE OF SLAVERY AND ‘MODES OF PRODUCTION’ MORE GENERALLY 
It’s ﬁendishly difﬁcult to ‘ﬁnd slavery’ in the archaeological record,unaided by written records; but on the West Coast we can at least observehow many of the elements that later came together in the institution ofslavery emerged at roughly the same time, starting around 1850 BC, in what’s called the Middle Paciﬁc period. This is when we ﬁrst observe thebulk harvesting of anadromous ﬁsh, an incredibly bounteous resource –later travellers recounted salmon runs so massive one could not see the water for the ﬁsh – but one that involved a dramatic intensiﬁcation of labour demands. It’s presumably no coincidence that around this same time, we seealso the ﬁrst signs of warfare and the building of defensive fortiﬁcations,and expanding trade networks.31 There are also some other pointers.
Cemeteries of Middle Paciﬁc age, between 1850 BC and AD 200, revealextreme disparities in treatments of the dead, something not seen in earliertimes. At the ‘top end’, the most privileged burials exhibit formal systemsof body ornamentation, and the somewhat macabre staging of corpses inseated, reclining or other ﬁxed positions, presumably referencing a stricthierarchy of ritual postures and manners among the living. At the ‘bottom’we see quite the other extreme: mutilation of certain individuals’ bodies,recycling of human bone to make tools and containers, and the ‘offering’ ofpeople as grave goods (i.e. human sacriﬁce). The overall impression is of awide spectrum of formalized statuses, ranging from high rank to peoplewhose lives and deaths appear to have mattered little.32 

Turning now to California, one thing we can note straight away is theabsence of all these features in correspondingly early periods. South ofCape Mendocino we seem to be dealing with a different kind of MiddlePaciﬁc – a more ‘paciﬁc’ one, in fact. But we can’t put these differencesdown to a lack of contact between the two groups. On the contrary,archaeological and linguistic evidence demonstrates extensive movement ofpeople and goods along much of the West Coast. A vibrant, canoe-bornemaritime commerce already linked coastal and island societies, conveyingvaluables such as shell beads, copper, obsidian and a host of organiccommodities across the diverse ecologies of the Paciﬁc littoral. Variouslines of evidence also point to the movement of human captives as a featureof inter-group warfare and trade. As early as 1500 BC, some parts of theshoreline around the Salish Sea were already equipped with fortiﬁcationsand shelters, in apparent anticipation of raids.33 

So far, we have been talking about slavery without really deﬁning the term.This is a little unwise, because Amerindian slavery had certain speciﬁcfeatures that make it very different from ancient Greek or Roman householdslavery, let alone European plantation slavery in the Caribbean or in America’s Deep South. While slavery of any sort was a fairly unusualinstitution among indigenous peoples of the Americas, some of thesedistinctively Amerindian features were shared, at least in their broadoutlines, across much of the continent, including the tropics, where theearliest Spanish sources document local forms of slavery back to theﬁfteenth century AD. The Brazilian anthropologist Fernando Santos-Granerohas coined a term for Amerindian societies that possessed these features. Hecalls them ‘capturing societies’.34 

Before exploring what he means, let’s deﬁne slavery itself. What makes aslave different from a serf, a peon, captive or inmate is their lack of socialties. In legal terms, at least, a slave has no family, no kin, no community;they can make no promises and forge no ongoing connections with otherhuman beings. This is why the English word ‘free’ is actually derived froma root meaning ‘friend’. Slaves could not have friends because they couldnot make commitments to others, since they were entirely under someoneelse’s power and their only obligation was to do exactly what their mastersaid. If a Roman legionary was captured in battle and enslaved, thenmanaged to escape and return home, he had to go through an elaborateprocess of restoring all his social relationships, including remarrying hiswife, since the act of enslaving him was considered to have severed allprevious relationships. The West Indian sociologist Orlando Patterson hasreferred to this as a condition of ‘social death’.35 

Unsurprisingly, the archetypical slaves are usually war captives, who aretypically far from home amid people who owe them nothing. There isanother practical reason for turning war captives into slaves. A slave’smaster has a responsibility to keep them alive in a ﬁt state to work. Mosthuman beings need a good deal of care and resources, and can usually beconsidered a net economic loss until they are twelve or sometimes ﬁfteenyears old. It rarely makes economic sense to breed slaves – which is why,globally, slaves have so often been the product of military aggression(though many were also products of debt traps, punitive judicial decisionsor banditry). Seen one way, a slave-raider is stealing the years of caringlabour another society invested to create a work-capable human being.36 

What, then, do Amerindian ‘capturing societies’ have in common whichmakes them distinctive from other kinds of slave-holding societies? On theface of it, not much. And least of all their modes of subsistence, which wereabout as diverse as could be imagined. As Santos-Granero points out, in Northwest Amazonia the dominant peoples were sedentary horticulturalistsand ﬁshermen living along the largest rivers, who raided the nomadichunting-gathering bands of the hinterland. By contrast, in the ParaguayRiver basin it was semi-itinerant hunter-gatherers who raided or subjugatedvillage agriculturalists. In southern Florida the hegemonic groups (Calusa,in this case) were ﬁshermen-gatherers who lived in large, permanentvillages but moved seasonally to ﬁshing and gathering sites, raiding bothﬁshing and farming communities.37 

Classifying these groups according to how much they farmed, ﬁshed orhunted tells us little of their actual histories. What really mattered, in termsof the ebb and ﬂow of power and resources, was their use of organizedviolence to ‘feed off’ other populations. Sometimes the foraging peoples –such as the Guaicurú of the Paraguay palm savannah, or the Calusa ofFlorida Keys – had the upper hand militarily over their agriculturalneighbours. In such cases, taking slaves and exacting tribute exempted aportion of the dominant society from basic subsistence chores, andsupported the existence of leisured elites. It also supported the training ofspecialized warrior castes, which in turn created the means for furtherappropriation and further tribute.
Here, again, the idea of classifying human societies by ‘modes ofsubsistence’ looks decidedly naive. How, for instance, would we propose toclassify foragers who consume quantities of domestic crops, exacted astribute from nearby farming populations? Marxists, who refer to ‘modes ofproduction’, do sometimes allow for a ‘Tributary Mode,’ but this hasalways been linked to the growth of agrarian states and empires, back toBook III of Marx’s Capital.38 What really needs to be theorized here is notjust the mode of production practised by victims of predation, but also thatof the non-producers who prey on them. Now wait. A non-productive modeof production? This sounds like a contradiction in terms. But it’s only so ifwe limit the meaning of ‘production’ strictly to the creation of food orgoods. And maybe we shouldn’t.
‘Capturing societies’ in the Americas considered slave-taking as a modeof subsistence in its own right, but not in the usual sense of producingcalories. Raiders almost invariably insisted that slaves were captured fortheir life force or ‘vitality’ – vitality which was consumed by theconquering group.39 Now, you might say this is literally true: if you exploitanother human being for their labour, either directly or indirectly, you are living off their energies or life force; and if they are providing you withfood, you are in fact eating it. But there is slightly more going on here.
Let’s recall Amazonian ideas of ownership. You appropriate somethingfrom nature, killing or uprooting it, but then this initial act of violence istransformed into a relation of caring, as you maintain and tend what iscaptured. Slave-raiding was talked about in similar terms, as hunting(traditionally men’s work), and captives were likened to vanquished prey.Experiencing social death, they would come to be regarded as somethingmore like ‘pets’. While being re-socialized in their captors’ households theyhad to be nurtured, cooked for, fed and instructed in the proper ways ofcivilization; in short, domesticated (these tasks were usually women’swork). If the socialization was completed, the captive ceased to be a slave.However, captives could sometimes be kept suspended in social death, aspart of a permanent pool of victims awaiting their actual, physical death.Typically they would be killed at collective feasts (akin to the NorthwestCoast potlatch) presided over by ritual specialists, and this wouldsometimes result in the eating of enemy ﬂesh.40 

All this may seem exotic. However, it echoes the way exploited peopleeverywhere and throughout history tend to feel about their situation: theirbosses, or landlords, or superiors are blood-sucking vampires, and they aretreated at best as pets and at worst as cattle. It’s just that in the Americas, ahandful of societies enacted those relationships in a quite literal fashion.The more important point, concerning ‘modes of production’ or ‘modes ofsubsistence’, is that this kind of exploitation often took the form of ongoingrelations between societies. Slavery almost always tends to do this, sinceimposing ‘social death’ on people whose biological relatives speak thesame language as you and can easily travel to where you live will alwayscreate problems.
Let’s recall how some of the ﬁrst European travellers to the Americascompared ‘savage’ males to noblemen back home – because, like thesenoblemen, they dedicated almost all their time to politics, hunting, raidingand waging war on neighbouring groups. A German observer in 1548 spokeof Arawakan villagers of the Grand Chaco in Paraguay as serfs of Guaicurúforagers, ‘in the same way as German rustics are with respect to their lords’.The implication was that little really separates a Guaicurú warrior from aSwabian feudal baron, who likely spoke French at home, feasted regularlyon wild game and lived off the labour of German-speaking peasants, even though he had never touched a plough. At what point, we might then ask,were the Guaicurú, who lived amid piles of maize, manioc (cassava) andother agricultural products delivered as tribute, as well as slaves secured inraids on societies even further distant, no longer simply ‘hunter-gatherers’(especially if they were also hunting and gathering other humans)?
True, crops were sent as tribute from nearby conquered villages, buttributary villages also sent servants, and raids on villages further out tendedto concentrate on enslaving women, who could serve as concubines,nursemaids and domestics – allowing Guaicurú ‘princesses’, their bodiesoften completely covered with intricate tattoos and spiral designs painted ondaily by their domestics, to devote their days to leisure. Early Spanishcommentators always remarked that Guaicurú treated their slaves with careand even tenderness, almost exactly as they did their pet parrots anddogs,41 but what was really going on here? If slavery is the theft of labourthat other societies invest in bringing up children, and the main purpose towhich slaves were put was caring for children, or attending to and groominga leisure class, then, paradoxically, the main objective of slave-taking forthe ‘capturing society’ seems to have been to increase its internal capacityfor caring labour. What was ultimately being produced here, withinGuaicurú society, were certain kinds of people: nobles, princesses, warriors,commoners, servants, and so on.42 

What needs emphasizing – since it will become extremely important asour story unfolds – is the profound ambivalence, or perhaps we might bettersay double-edged-ness, of these caring relationships. Amerindian societiestypically referred to themselves by some term that can be roughly translatedas ‘human beings’ – most of the tribal names traditionally applied to themby Europeans are derogatory terms used by their neighbours (‘Eskimo’, forexample, means ‘people who don’t cook their ﬁsh’, and ‘Iroquois’ isderived from an Algonkian term meaning ‘vicious killers’). Almost all thesesocieties took pride in their ability to adopt children or captives – even fromamong those whom they considered the most benighted of their neighbours
– and, through care and education, turn them into what they considered tobe proper human beings. Slaves, it follows, were an anomaly: people whowere neither killed nor adopted, but who hovered somewhere in between;abruptly and violently suspended in the midpoint of a process that shouldnormally lead from prey to pet to family. As such, the captive as slavebecomes trapped in the role of ‘caring for others’, a non-person whose work is largely directed towards enabling those others to become persons,warriors, princesses, ‘human beings’ of a particularly valued and specialkind. 
As these examples show, if we want to understand the origins of violentdomination in human societies, this is precisely where we need to look.Mere acts of violence are passing; acts of violence transformed into caringrelations have a tendency to endure. Now that we have a clearer idea ofwhat Amerindian slavery actually involved, let us return to the PaciﬁcCoast of North America and try to understand some of the speciﬁcconditions that made chattel slavery so prevalent on the Northwest Coast,and so unusual in California. We’ll start with a piece of oral history, an oldstory. 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER ‘THE STORY OF THE WOGIES’ – AN INDIGENOUS CAUTIONARY TALE ABOUT THE DANGERS OF TRYING TO GET RICH QUICK BY ENSLAVING OTHERS (ANDINDULGE OURSELVES IN AN ASIDE ON ‘GUNS, GERMS ANDSTEEL’) 
The story we’re about to recount is ﬁrst attested in 1873 by the geographer
A. W. Chase. Chase claims it was related to him by people of the ChetcoNation of Oregon. It concerns the origins of the word ‘Wogie’ (pronounced‘Wâgeh’), which across much of the coastal region was an indigenous termfor white settlers. The story didn’t really register among scholars; it wasrepeated a couple of times in the following half-century or so, but otherwisethat was it. Yet this long-overlooked story contains some precious gems ofinformation, especially about indigenous attitudes to slavery, at preciselythe interface between California and the Northwest Coast that we’ve been exploring.
Barely a handful of Chetco exist today. Originally dominating thesouthern shoreline of Oregon, they were largely wiped out in genocidalmassacres carried out by invading settlers in the mid nineteenth century. Bythe 1870s, a small number of survivors were living in the SiletzReservation, now in Lincoln County. This is what their ancestors told Chaseabout their origins and where they had come from: The Chetkos say that, many seasons ago, their ancestors came incanoes from the far north, and landed at the river’s mouth. Theyfound two tribes in possession, one a warlike race, resemblingthemselves; these they soon conquered and exterminated. The otherwas a diminutive people, of an exceedingly mild disposition, andwhite. These called themselves, or were called by the new-comers,‘Wogies.’ They were skillful in the manufacture of baskets, robes,and canoes, and had many methods of taking game and ﬁsh whichwere unknown to the invaders. Refusing to ﬁght, the Wogies weremade slaves of, and kept at work to provide food and shelter andarticles of use for the more warlike race, who waxed very fat andlazy. One night, however, after a grand feast, the Wogies packed upand ﬂed, and were never more seen. When the ﬁrst white menappeared, the Chetkos supposed that they were the Wogies returned.They soon found out their mistake, however, but retained amongthemselves the appellation for the white men, who are known asWogies by all the coast tribes in the vicinity.43 

The tale might seem unassuming, but there’s a lot packed into it. That thesurvivors of a forager group on the Oregon coast should narrate Euro-American colonization as an act of historical vengeance is unsurprising.44 
Neither is there anything implausible about an indigenous slave-holdingsociety migrating south by sea into new territory, at some remote time, andeither subjugating or killing the autochthonous inhabitants.45 

Similarly to the Guaicurú, the aggressors appear to have made a point ofsubduing people with skills they themselves lacked. What the ‘proto-Chetco’ acquired was not just physical brawn (‘Wogie labour’) or evencare, but the accumulated savoir-faire of a hunter-ﬁsher-forager people notentirely unlike themselves and, according to the story at least, in manyrespects more capable.
Another intriguing feature of this story is its setting. The Chetco lived inthe intermediate zone between our two major culture regions, preciselywhere one would imagine the institution of slavery to be most explicitlydebated and contested. And indeed, the story has a distinctly ethical ﬂavour,as if it were a cautionary tale aimed at anyone tempted to render othersslaves, or acquire wealth and leisure through raiding. Having forced theirvictims into servitude, growing ‘fat and lazy’ on the proceeds, it’s the Chetcos’ newfound sloth that makes them unable to pursue the ﬂeeingWogies. The Wogies come out of the whole affair on top by virtue of theirpaciﬁsm, industriousness, craft skills and capacity for innovation; indeed,they get to make a lethal return – in spirit, at least – as Euro-Americansettlers equipped with ‘guns, germs, and steel’.46 

Taking this into account, the tale of the Wogies points to some intriguingpossibilities. Most importantly, it indicates that the rejection of slaveryamong groups in the region between California and the Northwest Coasthad strong ethical and political dimensions. And indeed, once one startslooking, it’s not hard to ﬁnd further evidence for this. The Yurok, forexample, did hold a small number of slaves, mainly debt peons or captivesnot yet ransomed by their relatives. But their legends evince a strongdisapproval. To take one example, a heroic protagonist makes his fame bydefeating a maritime adventurer named Le’mekwelolmei, who wouldpillage and enslave passing travellers. After defeating him in combat, ourhero rejects his appeal to join forces: 
‘No, I do not want to be like you, summoning boats to the shore,seizing them and their cargo, and making people slaves. As long asyou live you will never be tyrannous again, but like other men.’
‘I will do so,’ said Le’mekwelolmei.
‘If you return to your former ways, I will kill you. Perhaps Ishould take you for a slave now, but I will not. Stay in your homeand keep what is yours and leave people alone.’ To the slaves whostood about nearly ﬁlling the river bank, he said, ‘Go to your homes.You are free now.’ 
The people who had been enslaved surrounded him, weeping andthanking him and wanting to drag his boat back to the water. ‘No, Iwill drag it myself,’ he said, and then with one hand he lifted it tothe river. So the freed people all scattered, some down-river andsome upriver to their homes.47 

Northwest Coast-style maritime raiding was in no sense celebrated, to saythe least. 
Still, one might ask: might there not be a more straightforwardexplanation for the prevalence of slavery on the Northwest Coast, and itsabsence further south? It’s easy to express moral disapproval of a practice if there’s not much economic incentive to practise it anyway. An ecologicaldeterminist would almost necessarily argue this, and in fact there is a bodyof literature that makes just such an argument for the Paciﬁc Coast – and it’sabout the only literature that does actually take on the question of whydifferent coastal societies looked so different in the ﬁrst place. This is abranch of behavioural ecology called ‘optimal foraging theory’. Itsproponents make some interesting points. Before proceeding, then, let usconsider them. 
IN WHICH WE ASK: WOULD YOU RATHER FISH, OR GATHERACORNS? 
Optimal foraging theory is a style of predictive modelling that originates inthe study of non-human species such as starlings, honeybees or ﬁsh.Applied to humans, it typically frames behaviour in terms of economicrationality, i.e.: ‘foragers will design their hunting and collecting strategieswith the intention of obtaining a maximum return in calories, for aminimum outlay of labour.’ This is what behavioural ecologists call a ‘cost.beneﬁt’ calculation. First you ﬁgure out how foragers ought to act, if theyare trying to be as efﬁcient as possible. Then you examine how they do infact act. If it doesn’t correspond to the optimum foraging strategy,something else must be going on.
From this perspective, the behaviour of indigenous Californians was farfrom optimal. As we’ve noted, they relied primarily on gathering acornsand pine nuts as staples. In a region as bounteous as California, there’s noobvious reason to do this. Acorns and pine nuts offer tiny individual foodpackages and require a great deal of labour to process. To render themedible, most varieties require the back-breaking work of leaching andgrinding to be carried out, to remove toxins and release nutrients. Nut yieldscan vary dramatically from one season to the next, a risky pattern of boomand bust. At the same time, ﬁsh are found in abundance from the PaciﬁcCoast inland at least as far as the conﬂuence of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers. Fish are both more nutritious and more reliable than nuts.Despite this, salmon and other aquatic foods generally came second to treecrops in Californian diets, and this seems to have been the case long beforethe arrival of Europeans.48 

In terms of ‘optimal foraging theory’, then, the behaviour of Californianssimply makes no sense. Salmon can be harvested and processed in greatquantities on an annual basis, and they provide oil and fats as well asprotein. In terms of cost-beneﬁt calculations, the peoples of the NorthwestCoast are eminently more sensible than Californians, and have been forhundreds or even thousands of years.49 Granted, they also had little choice,since nut-gathering was never a serious option on the Northwest Coast (themain forest species there are conifers). It’s also true that Northwest Coastpeoples enjoyed a greater range of ﬁsh than Californians, includingeulachon (candleﬁsh), intensively exploited for its oil, which was both astaple food and a core ingredient in ‘grease feasts,’ where nobles ladledgreat quantities of this stuff on to the burning hearth, and occasionally on toone another. But the Californians did have a choice. 
California, then, is an ecological puzzle. Most of its indigenousinhabitants appear to have prided themselves on their hard work, clear-sighted practicality and prudence in monetary affairs – quite unlike the wildand excessive self-image of Northwest Coast chiefs, who liked to boast thatthey ‘didn’t care about anything’ – but as it turns out, the Californians werethe ones basing their entire regional economy on apparently irrationalchoices. Why did they choose to intensify the use of oak groves and pinionstands when so many rich ﬁsheries were available?
Ecological determinists sometimes try to solve the puzzle by appealing tofood security. Brigands like Le’mekwelolmei might have been seen asvillains, at least in some quarters, but brigands, they argue, will alwaysexist. And what is more attractive to thieves and raiders than stockpiles ofalready processed, easy-to-transport food? But dead ﬁsh, for reasons thatshould be obvious to all of us, cannot be left lying around. They must beeither eaten immediately or cleaned, ﬁlleted, dried and smoked to preventinfestation. On the Northwest Coast these tasks were completed likeclockwork in the spring and summer, because they were critical for thegroup’s physical survival, and also its social survival in the competitivefeasting exploits of the winter season.50 

In the technical language of behavioural ecology, ﬁsh are ‘front-loaded’.You have to do most of the work of preparation right away. As a result, onecould argue that a decision to rely heavily on ﬁsh – while undoubtedlysensible in purely nutritional terms – is also weaving a noose for one’s ownneck. It meant investing in the creation of a storable surplus of processed and packaged foods (not just preserved meat, but also fats and oils), whichalso meant creating an irresistible temptation for plunderers.51 Acorns and nuts, on the other hand, present neither such risks nor such temptations.They are ‘back-loaded’. Harvesting them was a simple and fairly leisurelyaffair,52 and, crucially, there was no need for processing prior to storage.Instead most of the hard work took place only just before consumption:leaching and grinding to make porridges, cakes and biscuits. (This is thevery opposite of smoked ﬁsh, which you don’t even have to cook if youdon’t want to.)
So there was little point in raiding a store of raw acorns. As a result, therewas also no real incentive to develop organized ways of defending thesestores against potential raiders. One can begin to see the logic here.Salmon-ﬁshing and acorn-gathering simply have very different practicalaffordances, which over the long term might be expected to produce verydifferent sorts of societies: one warlike and prone to raiding (and after youhave made off with the food, it’s not much of a leap to begin carrying offprisoners as well), the other essentially peaceful.53 Northwest Coast societies, then, were warlike because they simply didn’t have the option ofrelying on a war-proof staple food.
It’s certainly an elegant theory, quite clever and satisfying in its own way.54 The problem is it just doesn’t seem to match up to historical reality.The ﬁrst and most obvious difﬁculty is that the capture of dried ﬁsh, orfoodstuffs of any kind, was never a signiﬁcant aim of Northwest Coastinter-group raiding. To put it bluntly, there’s only so many smoked ﬁsh onecan pile up in a war canoe. And carrying bulk products overland was evenmore difﬁcult: pack animals being entirely absent in this part of theAmericas, everything had to be carried by human beings, and on a long tripa slave is likely to eat about as much as they can carry. The main aim ofraids was always to capture people, never food.55 But this was also one of the most densely populated regions of North America. Where, then, did thishunger for people come from? These are precisely the kind of questions that‘optimal foraging theory’ and other ‘rational-choice’ approaches seemutterly unable to answer.
In fact, the ultimate causes of slavery didn’t lie in environmental ordemographic conditions, but in Northwest Coast concepts of the properordering of society; and these, in turn, were the result of political jockeyingby different sectors of the population who, as everywhere, had somewhat different perspectives on what a proper society should be. The simplereality is that there was no shortage of working hands in Northwest Coasthouseholds. But a good proportion of those hands belonged to aristocratictitle holders who felt strongly that they should be exempted from menialwork. They might hunt manatees or killer whales, but it was inconceivablefor them to be seen building weirs or gutting ﬁsh. First-hand accounts showthis often became an issue in the spring and summer, when the only limitson ﬁsh-harvesting were the number of hands available to process andpreserve the catch. Rules of decorum prevented nobles from joining in,while low-ranking commoners (‘perpetual transients’, as one ethnographercalled them)56 would instantly defect to a rival household if pressed toohard or called upon too often.
In other words, aristocrats probably did feel that commoners should beworking like slaves for them, but commoners had other opinions. Manywere happy to devote long hours to art, but considered ﬁsh runs quiteanother matter. Indeed, the relation between title-holding nobles and theirdependants seems to have been under constant negotiation. Sometimes itwas not entirely clear who was serving whom: 
High rank was a birthright but a noble could not rest on his laurels.He had to ‘keep up’ his name through generous feasting,potlatching, and general open-handedness. Otherwise he ran the risknot only of losing face but in extreme cases actually losing hisposition, or even his life. Swadesh tells of a despotic [Nootka] chiefwho was murdered for ‘robbing’ his commoners by demanding allof his ﬁshermen’s catch, rather than the usual tributary portion. Hissuccessor outdid himself in generosity, saying when he caught awhale, ‘You people cut it up and everyone take one chunk; just leavethe little dorsal ﬁn for me.’57 

The result, from the nobles’ point of view, was a perennial shortage, not oflabour as such but of controllable labour at key times of year. This was theproblem to which slavery addressed itself. And such were the immediatecauses, which made ‘harvesting people’ from neighbouring clans no lessessential to the aboriginal economy of the Northwest Coast thanconstructing weirs, clam gardens or terraced root plots.58 

So we must conclude that ecology does not explain the presence ofslavery on the Northwest Coast. Freedom does. Title-holding aristocrats,locked in rivalry with one another, simply lacked the means to compel theirown subjects to support their endless games of magniﬁcence. They wereforced to look abroad. 
What, then, of California?
Picking up where we left off, with the ‘tale of the Wogies’, a logicalplace to start is precisely the boundary zone between these two cultureareas. As it turns out, the Yurok and other ‘Protestant foragers’ of northernCalifornia were, even by Californian standards, unusual, and it behoves usto understand why. 
IN WHICH WE TURN TO THE CULTIVATION OF DIFFERENCE IN THE PACIFIC ‘SHATTER ZONE’ 
Alfred Kroeber, who pioneered the ethnographic study of California’sindigenous population, described its northwest section as a ‘shatter zone’,an area of unusual diversity, bridging the two great culture areas of thePaciﬁc littoral. Here the distribution of ethnic and language groups – Yurok,Karuk, Hupa, Tolowa, and as many as a dozen even smaller societies –compressed like the bellows of an accordion. Some of these micro-nationsspoke languages of the Athabascan family; others, in their domesticarrangements and architecture, retained traces of aristocracy that pointclearly to their origins somewhere up on the Northwest Coast. Still, withvery few exceptions, none practised chattel slavery.59 

To underscore the contrast, we should note that in any true NorthwestCoast settlement hereditary slaves might have constituted up to a quarter ofthe population. These ﬁgures are striking. As we noted earlier, they rival thedemographic balance in the colonial South at the height of the cotton boomand are in line with estimates for household slavery in classical Athens.60 
If so, these were full-blown ‘slave societies’ where unfree labourunderpinned the domestic economy and sustained the prosperity of noblesand commoners alike. Assuming that many groups came south from theNorthwest Coast, as linguistic and other evidence suggests, and that at leastsome of this movement took place after about 1800 BC (when slavery wasmost likely institutionalized), the question becomes: when and how didforagers in the ‘shatter zone’ come to lose the habit of keeping slaves? 
The ‘when’ part of this question is really a matter for future research. The‘how’ part is more accessible. In many of these societies one can observecustoms that seem explicitly designed to head off the danger of captivestatus becoming permanent. Consider, for example, the Yurok requirementfor victors in battle to pay compensation for each life taken, at the same rateone would pay if one were guilty of murder. This seems a highly efﬁcientway of making inter-group raiding both ﬁscally pointless and morallybankrupt. In monetary terms, military advantage became a liability to thewinning side. As Kroeber put it, ‘The vae victis of civilization might wellhave been replaced among the Yurok, in a monetary sense at least, by thedictum: “Woe to the victors.”’61 

The Chetcos’ cautionary tale of the Wogies offers some further pointers.It suggests that populations directly adjacent to the Californian ‘shatterzone’ were aware of their northern neighbours and saw them as warlike,and as disposed to a life of luxury based on exploiting the labour of thosethey subdued. It implies they recognized such exploitation as a possibilityin their own societies yet rejected it, since keeping slaves would undermineimportant social values (they would become ‘fat and lazy’). Turning south,to the California shatter zone itself, we ﬁnd evidence that, in many keyareas of social life, the foragers of this region were indeed building theircommunities, in good schismogenetic fashion, as a kind of mirror image; aconscious inversion of those on the Northwest Coast. Some examples are inorder. 
Clues emerge from the simplest and most apparently pragmatic details.Let us cite just one or two. No free member of a Northwest Coast householdwould ever be seen chopping or carrying wood.62 To do so was to undermine one’s own status, effectively making oneself the equivalent of aslave. Californian chiefs, by contrast, seem to have elevated these exactsame activities into a solemn public duty, incorporating them into the corerituals of the sweat lodge. As Goldschmidt observed: 
All men, particularly the youths, were exhorted to gather wood for
use in sweating. This was not exploitation of child labor, but an
important religious act, freighted with signiﬁcance. Special wood
was brought from the mountain ridges; it was used for an important
puriﬁcation ritual. The gathering itself was a religious act, for it was
a means of acquiring ‘luck.’ It had to be done with the proper 
psychological attitude of which restrained demeanor and constant
thinking about the acquisition of riches were the chief elements. The
job became a moral end rather than a means to an end, with both
religious and economic involvements.63 

Similarly, the ritual sweating that ensued – by purging the Californianmale’s body of surplus ﬂuid – inverts the excessive consumption of fat,blubber and grease that signiﬁed masculine status on the Northwest Coast.To enhance his status and impress his ancestors, the nobleman of theNorthwest Coast ladled candleﬁsh oil into the ﬁre at the tournament ﬁelds of the potlatch; the Californian chief, by contrast, burned calories in theclosed seclusion of his sweat lodge.
Native Californians seem to have been well aware of the kinds of values they were rejecting. They even institutionalized them in the ﬁgure of theclown,64 whose public antics of sloth, gluttony and megalomania – whileoffering a platform from which to sound off about local problems anddiscontents – also seem to parody the most coveted values of a proximatecivilization. Further inversions occur in the domains of spiritual andaesthetic life. Artistic traditions of the Northwest Coast are all about spectacle and deception: the theatrical trickery of masks that ﬂicker openand shut, of surface ﬁgures pulling the gaze in sharply opposed directions.The native word for ‘ritual’ in most Northwest Coast languages actuallytranslates as ‘fraud’ or ‘illusion’.65 Californian spirituality provides analmost perfect antithesis. What mattered was cultivation of the inner self through discipline, earnest training, and hard work. Californian art entirelyavoids the use of masks. 
Moreover, Californian songs and poetry show that disciplined trainingand work were ways of connecting with what is authentic in life. So, whileNorthwest Coast groups were not averse to adopting Europeans in lavishnaming ceremonies, would-be Californians – like Robert Frank, adopted bythe Yurok in the late nineteenth century – were more likely to ﬁndthemselves hauling wood from the mountains, weeping with each footfall,as they earned their place among the ‘real people’.66 

If we accept that what we call ‘society’ refers to the mutual creation ofhuman beings, and that ‘value’ refers to the most conscious aspects of thatprocess, then it really is hard to see the Northwest Coast and California asanything but opposites. People in both regions engaged in extravagant expenditures of labour, but the forms and functions of that labour could nothave differed more. In the Northwest Coast, the exuberant multiplication offurniture, crests, poles, masks, mantles and boxes was consistent with theextravagance and theatricality of potlatch. The ultimate purpose of all thiswork and ritual creativity, however, was to ‘fasten on’ names and titles toaristocratic contenders – to fashion speciﬁc sorts of persons. The result,among other things, is that Northwest Coast artistic traditions are stillwidely considered among the most dazzling the world has ever seen;immediately recognizable for their strong focus on the theme of exteriority
– a world of masks, illusions and façades.67 

Societies in the Californian shatter zone were equally extravagant in theirown way. But if they were ‘potlatching’ anything, then surely it was labouritself. As one ethnographer wrote of another Yurok neighbour, theAtsugewi: ‘The ideal individual was both wealthy and industrious. In theﬁrst grey haze of dawn he arose to begin his day’s work, never ceasingactivity until late at night. Early rising and the ability to go without sleepwere great virtues. It was extremely complimentary to say “he doesn’t knowhow to sleep.”’68 Wealthy men – and it should be noted that all thesesocieties were decidedly patriarchal – were typically seen as providers forpoorer dependants, improvident folk and foolish drifters, by virtue of theirown self-discipline and labour and that of their wives.
With its ‘Protestant’ emphasis on interiority and introspection,Californian spirituality offers a perfect counterpoint to the smoke andmirrors of Northwest Coast ceremonials. Among the Yurok, work properlyperformed became a way of connecting with a true reality, of which prizedobjects like dentalia and hummingbird scalps were mere outwardmanifestations. A contemporary ethnographer explains: 
As he ‘accumulates’ himself and becomes cleaner, the person intraining sees himself as more and more ‘real’ and thus the world asmore and more ‘beautiful’: a real place in experience rather thanmerely a setting for a ‘story,’ for intellectual knowledge … In 1865,Captain Spott, for instance, trained for many weeks as he helped themedicine man prepare for the First Salmon ceremony at the mouthof the Klamath River … ‘the old [medicine] man sent him to bringdown sweathouse wood. On the way he cried with nearly every stepbecause now he was seeing with his own eyes how it was done.’ … 
Tears, crying, are of crucial importance in Yurok spiritual training as
manifestations of personal yearning, sincerity, humility, and 
openness.69 

Through such exertions one discovered one’s true vocation and purpose;and when ‘someone else’s purpose in life is to interfere with you,’ the sameethnographer was told, ‘he must be stopped, lest you become his slave, his“pet”.’ 
The Yurok, with their puritanical manners and extraordinary culturalemphasis on work and money, might seem an odd choice to celebrate asanti-slavery heroes (though many Calvinist Abolitionists were not so verydifferent). But of course we’re not introducing them as heroes, any morethan we wish to represent their Northwest Coast neighbours as the villainsof the piece. We are introducing them as a way to illustrate how the processby which cultures deﬁne themselves against one another is always, at root,political, since it involves self-conscious arguments about the proper way tolive. Revealingly, the arguments appear to have been most intense preciselyin this border zone between anthropological ‘culture areas’.
As we mentioned, the Yurok and their immediate neighbours weresomewhat unusual, even by Californian standards. Yet they are unusual incontradictory ways. On the one hand, they actually did hold slaves, if few innumber. Almost all the peoples of central and southern California, theMaidu, Wintu, Pomo and so on, rejected the institution entirely.70 There appear to have been at least two reasons for this. First, almost everywhereexcept in the northwest, a man or woman’s money and other wealth wasritually burned at death – and as a result, the institution served as aneffective levelling mechanism.71 The Yurok-Karuk-Hupa area was one ofthe few places where dentalium could actually be inherited. Combine thiswith the fact that quarrels did lead to war much more frequently here thananywhere else, and you have a kind of shrunken, diminished version of theNorthwest Coast ranking system, in this case a tripartite division betweenwealthy families, ordinary Yurok and paupers.72 

Captives were not slaves, all sources insist they were redeemed quickly,and all killers had to pay compensation; but all this required money. Thismeant the important men who often instigated wars could proﬁthandsomely from the affair by lending to those unable to pay, and the latter were thus either reduced to debt peons, or retreated to live ignominiously inisolated homesteads in the woods.73 One might see the intense focus onobtaining money, and resultant puritanism, and also the strong moralopposition to slave-raiding as a result of tensions created by living in thisunstable and chaotic buffer zone between the two regions. Elsewhere inCalifornia, formal chiefs or headmen existed, and though they wielded nopower of compulsion they settled conﬂicts by raising funds forcompensation collectively, and the focus of cultural life was less on theaccumulation of property than on organizing annual rites of world renewal.
Here one might say things have turned full circle. The ostensible purposeof the potlatch and spectacular competitions over wealth and heirloom titleson the Northwest Coast was, ultimately, to win prized roles in the greatmidwinter masquerades that were, similarly, intended to revive the forces ofnature. California chiefs too were ultimately concerned with wintermasquerades – being Californians, they did not employ literal masks, but,as in the Kwakiutl midwinter ceremonial, gods came down to earth andwere embodied in costumed dancers – designed to regenerate the world andsave it from imminent destruction. The difference, of course, was that in theabsence of a servile labour force or any system of hereditary titles,Californian Pomo or Maidu chiefs had to go about organizing such rituals inan entirely different way. 
SOME CONCLUSIONS 
Environmental determinists have an unfortunate tendency to treat humansas little more than automata, living out some economist’s fantasy of rationalcalculation. To be fair, they don’t deny that human beings are quirky andimaginative creatures – they just seem to reason that, in the long run, thisfact makes very little difference. Those who don’t follow an optimalpathway for the use of resources are destined for the ash heap of history.Anthropologists who object to this kind of determinism will typicallyappeal to culture, but ultimately this comes down to little more thaninsisting that explanation is impossible: English people act the way they dobecause they are English, Yurok act the way they do because they’re Yurok;why they are English or Yurok is not really ours to say. Humans – from thisother perspective, which is just as extreme in its own way – are at best anarbitrary constellation of cultural elements, perhaps assembled according to some prevailing spirit, code or ethos, and which society ends up with whichethos is treated as beyond explanation, little more than a random roll of thedice. 
Putting matters in such stark terms does not mean there is no truth toeither position. The intersection of environment and technology does makea difference, often a huge difference, and to some degree, culturaldifference really is just an arbitrary roll of the dice: there’s no ‘explanation’for why Chinese is a tonal language and Finnish an agglutinative one; that’sjust the way things happened to turn out. Still, if one treats the arbitrarinessof linguistic difference as the foundation of all social theory – which isbasically what structuralism did, and post-structuralism continues to do –the result is just as mechanically deterministic as the most extreme form ofenvironmental determination. ‘Language speaks us.’ We are doomed toendlessly enact patterns of behaviour not of our own creation; not ofanyone’s creation really, until some seismic shift in the cultural equivalentof tectonic plates lands us somehow in a new, equally inexplicablearrangement.
In other words, both approaches presume that we are already, effectively,stuck. This is why we ourselves place so much emphasis on the notion ofself-determination. Just as it is reasonable to assume that Pleistocene mammoth hunters, moving back and forth between different seasonal formsof organization, must have developed a degree of political self-consciousness – to have thought about the relative merits of different waysof living with one another – so too the intricate webs of cultural differencethat came to characterize human societies after the end of the last Ice Agemust surely have involved a degree of political introspection. Once again,our intention is simply to treat those who created these forms of culture asintelligent adults, capable of reﬂecting on the social worlds they werebuilding or rejecting.
Obviously, this approach, like any other, can be taken to ridiculousextremes. Returning momentarily to Weber’s Protestant Ethic, it is popularin certain circles to claim that ‘nations make choices’, that some havechosen to be Protestant and others Catholic, and that this is the main reasonso many people in the United States or Germany are rich, and so many inBrazil or Italy are poor. This makes about as much sense as arguing thatsince everyone is free to make their own decisions, the fact that somepeople end up as ﬁnancial consultants and others as security guards is entirely their own doing (indeed, it’s usually the same sort of people whomake both sorts of argument). Perhaps Marx put it best: we make our ownhistory, but not under conditions of our own choosing.
In fact, one reason social theorists will always be debating this issue isthat we can’t really know how much difference ‘human agency’ – thepreferred term, currently, for what used to be called ‘free will’ – reallymakes. Historical events by deﬁnition happen only once, and there’s no realway to know if they ‘might’ have turned out otherwise (might Spain havenever conquered Mexico? Could the steam engine have been invented inPtolemaic Egypt, leading to an ancient industrial revolution?), or what thepoint of asking is even supposed to be. It seems part of the human conditionthat while we cannot predict future events, as soon as those events dohappen we ﬁnd it hard to see them as anything but inevitable. There’s noway to know. So precisely where one wishes to set the dial betweenfreedom and determinism is largely a matter of taste.
Since this book is mainly about freedom, it seems appropriate to set thedial a bit further to the left than usual, and to explore the possibility thathuman beings have more collective say over their own destiny than weordinarily assume. Rather than deﬁning the indigenous inhabitants of thePaciﬁc Coast of North America as ‘incipient’ farmers or as examples of‘emerging’ complexity – which is really just an updated way of saying theywere all ‘rushing headlong for their chains’ – we have explored thepossibility that they might have been proceeding with (more or less) openeyes, and found plenty of evidence to support it.
Slavery, we’ve argued, became commonplace on the Northwest Coastlargely because an ambitious aristocracy found itself unable to reduce itsfree subjects to a dependable workforce. The ensuing violence seems tohave spread until those in what we’ve been calling the ‘shatter zone’ ofnorthern California gradually found themselves obliged to createinstitutions capable of insulating them from it, or at least its worst extremes.A schismogenetic process ensued, whereby coastal peoples came to deﬁnethemselves increasingly against each other. This was by no means just anargument about slavery; it appears to have affected everything from theconﬁguration of households, law, ritual and art to conceptions of what itmeant to be an admirable human being, and was most evident in contrastingattitudes to work, food and material wealth.74 

All this played a crucial role in shaping what outsiders came to see as thepredominant sensibility of each resulting ‘culture area’ – the ﬂamboyantextravagance of one, the austere simplicity of the other. But it also resultedin the overwhelming rejection of the practice of slavery, and the classsystem it entailed, throughout every part of California except for itsnorthwesternmost corner; and even there it remained sharply limited.
What does this tell us about the emergence of similar forms ofdomination in earlier phases of human history? Nothing for certain, ofcourse. It is difﬁcult to know for sure whether Mesolithic societies of the Baltic or Breton coast that remind us, superﬁcially, of indigenous societieson the Northwest Coast of Canada were, in fact, organized on similarprinciples. ‘Complexity’ – as reﬂected in the co-ordination of labour orelaborate ritual systems – need not mean domination. But it seems likelythat similar arrangements were, indeed, emerging in some parts of theworld, in some times and places, and that when they did they did not gouncontested. Regional processes of cultural differentiation, of the kind onebegins to see more evidence for after the end of the last Ice Age, wereprobably every bit as political as those of later ages, including the ones wehave considered in this chapter.
Second, we can now see more clearly that domination begins at home.The fact that these arrangements became subjects of political contestationdoes not mean they were political in origin. Slavery ﬁnds its origins in war.But everywhere we encounter it slavery is also, at ﬁrst, a domesticinstitution. Hierarchy and property may derive from notions of the sacred,but the most brutal forms of exploitation have their origins in the mostintimate of social relations: as perversions of nurture, love and caring.Certainly, those origins are not to be found in government. Northwest Coastsocieties lacked anything that could be remotely described as anoverarching polity; the closest they came were the organizing committees ofannual masquerades. Instead, one ﬁnds an endless succession of greatwooden houses, tiny courts each centring on a title-holding family, thecommoners attached to them, and their personal slaves. Even the ranksystem referred to divisions within the household. It seems very likely thiswas true in non-agricultural societies elsewhere as well.
Finally, all this suggests that, historically speaking, hierarchy andequality tend to emerge together, as complements to one another. Tlingit orHaida commoners on the Northwest Coast were effectively equals in that they were all equally excluded from the ranks of title holders and therefore,in comparison to the aristocrats – with their unique identities – formed akind of undifferentiated mass. Insofar as Californian societies rejected thatentire arrangement, they could be described as self-consciously egalitarian,but in a quite different sense. Odd as it may seem, this comes through mostclearly in their enthusiastic embrace of money, and again comparisons withtheir northern neighbours are instructive. For Northwest Coast societies,wealth, which was sacred in every sense of the term, consisted above all ofheirloom treasures, whose value was based on the fact that each was uniqueand there was nothing in the world like it. Equality between title holderswas simply inconceivable, much though they might have argued about whoultimately outranked whom. In California, the most important forms ofwealth consisted of currencies whose value lay in the degree to which eachstring of dentalium or band of woodpecker scalps was exactly the same, andcould therefore be counted – and, generally speaking, such wealth was notinherited but destroyed on the owner’s death.
As our story continues, we will encounter this dynamic repeatedly. We might refer to it, perhaps, as ‘inequality from below’. Domination ﬁrstappears on the most intimate, domestic level. Self-consciously egalitarianpolitics emerge to prevent such relations from extending beyond those smallworlds into the public sphere (which often comes to be imagined, in theprocess, as an exclusive sphere for adult men). These are the kind ofdynamics that culminated in phenomena like ancient Athenian democracy.But their roots probably extend much further back in time, to well beforethe advent of farming and agricultural societies. 

6 

Gardens of Adonis 
The revolution that never happened: how Neolithic peoples avoidedagriculture 
Let us turn, then, to the origins of farming. 
PLATONIC PREJUDICES, AND HOW THEY CLOUD OUR IDEASABOUT THE INVENTION OF FARMING 
‘Tell me this,’ writes Plato: 
Would a serious and intelligent farmer, with seeds he cared aboutand wished to grow to fruition, sow them in summer in the gardensof Adonis and rejoice as he watched them become beautiful in amatter of eight days; or if he did it at all, would he do this for funand festivity? For things he really was serious about, would he notuse his farmer’s craft, plant them in a suitable environment, and becontent if everything he planted came to maturity in the eighthmonth?1 

The gardens of Adonis, to which Plato is referring here, were a sort offestive speed farming which produced no food. For the philosopher, theyoffered a convenient simile for all things precocious, alluring, but ultimatelysterile. In the dog days of summer, when nothing can grow, the women ofancient Athens fashioned these little gardens in baskets and pots. Each helda mix of quick-sprouting grain and herbs. The makeshift seedbeds werecarried up ladders on to the ﬂat roofs of private houses and left to wilt in thesun: a botanical re-enactment of the premature death of Adonis, the fallenhunter, slain in his prime by a wild boar. Then, beyond the public gaze of men and civic authority, began the rooftop rites. Open to women from allclasses of Athenian society, including prostitutes, these were rites ofgrieving but also wanton drunkenness, and no doubt other forms of ecstaticbehaviour as well. 
Historians agree that the roots of this women’s cult lie in Mesopotamianfertility rites of Dumuzi/Tammuz, the shepherd-god and personiﬁcation ofplant life, mourned on his death each summer. Most likely the worship ofAdonis, his ancient Greek incarnation, spread westwards to Greece fromPhoenicia in the wake of Assyrian expansion, in the seventh century BC. Nowadays, some scholars see the whole thing as a riotous subversion ofpatriarchal values: an antithesis to the staid and proper state-sponsoredThesmophoria (the autumn festival of the Greek fertility goddess, Demeter),celebrated by the wives of Athenian citizens and dedicated to the seriousfarming on which the life of the city depended. Others read the story ofAdonis the other way round, as a requiem for the primeval drama of serioushunting, cast into shadow by the advent of agriculture, but not forgotten –an echo of lost masculinity.2 

All well and good, you may say, but what does any of this have to dowith the origins of farming? What have the gardens of Adonis got to dowith the ﬁrst Neolithic stirrings of agriculture some 8,000 years beforePlato? Well, in a sense, everything. Because these scholarly debatesencapsulate just the sort of problems that surround any moderninvestigation of this crucial topic. Was farming from the very beginningabout the serious business of producing more food to supply growingpopulations? Most scholars assume, as a matter of course, that this had to bethe principal reason for its invention. But maybe farming began as a moreplayful or even subversive kind of process – or perhaps even as a side effectof other concerns, such as the desire to spend longer in particular kinds oflocations, where hunting and trading were the real priorities. Which of thesetwo ideas really embodies the spirit of the ﬁrst agriculturalists; is it thestately and pragmatic Thesmophoria, or the playful and self-indulgentgardens of Adonis?
No doubt the peoples of the Neolithic – the world’s ﬁrst farmers –themselves spent a good deal of time debating similar questions. To get asense of why we say this, let’s consider what is probably the most famousNeolithic site in the world, Çatalhöyük. 
IN WHICH WE DISCUSS HOW ÇATALHÖYÜK, THE WORLD’SOLDEST TOWN, GOT A NEW HISTORY 
Located on the Konya Plain of central Turkey, Çatalhöyük was ﬁrst settledaround 7400 BC, and continued to be populated for some 1,500 years (forthe purposes of mental calibration, roughly the same period of time thatseparates us from Amalafrida, Queen of the Vandals, who reached theheight of her inﬂuence around AD 523). The site’s renown derives partlyfrom its surprising scale. At thirteen hectares, it was more town thanvillage, with a population of some 5,000. Yet it was a town with no apparentcentre or communal facilities, or even streets: just a dense agglomeration ofone household after another, all of similar sizes and layout, each accessedby ladder from the roof.
If the overall plan of Çatalhöyük suggests an ethos of dreary uniformity,a maze of identical mud walls, the internal life of its buildings points inexactly the opposite direction. In fact, another reason for the site’s fame isits inhabitants’ distinctly macabre sense of interior design. If you’ve everglimpsed the inside of a Çatalhöyük house you will never forget it: centralliving rooms, no more than sixteen feet across, with the skulls and horns ofcattle and other creatures projecting inwards from the walls, and sometimesoutwards from the ﬁttings and furnishings. Many rooms also had vivid wallpaintings and ﬁgurative mouldings, and contained platforms under whichresided some portion of the household dead – remains of between six andsixty individuals in any given house – propping up the living. We can’t helprecalling Maurice Sendak’s vision of a magical house where ‘the wallsbecame the world all around’.3 

Generations of archaeologists have wanted to see Çatalhöyük as amonument to the ‘origins of farming’. Certainly, it’s easy to understand whythis should be. It is among the ﬁrst large settlements we know of whoseinhabitants practised agriculture, and who got most of their nutrition fromdomesticated cereals, pulses, sheep and goats. It seems reasonable to seethem, then, as the very engineers of what has been referred to since the timeof V. Gordon Childe – prehistorian and author of Man Makes Himself (1936) and What Happened in History (1942) – as the ‘AgriculturalRevolution’, and when ﬁrst excavated in the 1960s Çatalhöyük’sremarkable material culture was interpreted in this way. Clay ﬁgurines ofseated women, including a famous example ﬂanked by felines, were understood as depictions of a Mother Goddess, presiding over the fertilityof women and crops. The wall-mounted ox-skulls (‘bucrania’) wereassumed to be those of domestic cattle, dedicated to a taurine deityresponsible for the protection and reproduction of herds. Certain buildingswere identiﬁed as ‘shrines’. All this ritual life was assumed to refer to serious farming – a Neolithic pageant play, more in the spirit of Demeterthan Adonis.4 

But more recent excavations suggest we have been too quick to write offAdonis.5 Since the 1990s, new methods of ﬁeldwork at Çatalhöyükproduced a string of surprises, which oblige us to revise both the history ofthe world’s oldest town and also how we think about the origins of farmingin general. The cattle, it turns out, were not domestic: those impressiveskulls belonged to ﬁerce, wild aurochs. The shrines were not shrines, buthouses in which people engaged in such everyday tasks as cooking, eatingand crafts – just like anywhere else, except they happened to contain alarger density of ritual paraphernalia. Even the Mother Goddess has beencast into shadow. It is not so much that corpulent female ﬁgurines stoppedturning up entirely in the excavations, but that the new ﬁnds tended toappear, not in shrines or on thrones, but in trash dumps outside houses withthe heads broken off and didn’t really seem to have been treated as objectsof religious veneration.6 

Today, most archaeologists consider it deeply unsound to interpretprehistoric images of corpulent women as ‘fertility goddesses’. The veryidea that they should be is the result of long-outmoded Victorian fantasiesabout ‘primitive matriarchy’. In the nineteenth century, it’s true, matriarchywas considered the default mode of political organization for Neolithicsocieties (as opposed to the oppressive patriarchy of the ensuing BronzeAge). As a result, almost every image of a fertile-looking woman wasinterpreted as a goddess. Nowadays, archaeologists are more likely to pointout that many ﬁgurines could just as easily have been the local equivalentsof Barbie dolls (the kind of Barbie dolls one might have in a society withvery different standards of female beauty); or that different ﬁgurines mighthave served entirely different purposes (no doubt correct); or to dismiss theentire debate by insisting we simply have no idea why people created somany female images and never will, so any interpretations on offer aremore likely to be projections of our own assumptions about women, gender or fertility than anything that would have made sense to an inhabitant ofNeolithic Anatolia. 
All of which might seem a bit pedantic, but in this hair-splitting, as we’llsee, there’s a great deal at stake. 
IN WHICH WE ENTER SOMETHING OF AN ACADEMIC NO-GO ZONE, AND DISCUSS THE POSSIBILITY OF NEOLITHICMATRIARCHIES 
It’s not just the idea of ‘primitive matriarchy’ that’s become such a bugabootoday: even to suggest that women had unusually prominent positions inearly farming communities is to invite academic censure. Perhaps it’s notentirely surprising. In the same way that social rebels, since the 1960s,tended to idealize hunter-gatherer bands, earlier generations of poets,anarchists and bohemians had tended to idealize the Neolithic as an imaginary, beneﬁcent theocracy ruled over by priestesses of the GreatGoddess, the all-powerful distant ancestor of Inanna, Ishtar, Astarte andDemeter herself – that is, until such societies were overwhelmed by violent,patriarchal Indo-European-speaking horse-men descending from thesteppes, or, in the case of the Middle East, Semitic-speaking nomads fromthe deserts. How people saw this imagined confrontation became the sourceof a major political divide in the late nineteenth and early twentiethcenturies. 
To give you a ﬂavour of this, let’s look at Matilda Joslyn Gage (1826–98), considered in her lifetime one of the most prominent Americanfeminists. Gage was also an anti-Christian, attracted to the Haudenosaunee‘matriarchate’, which she believed to be one of the few surviving examplesof Neolithic social organization, and a staunch defender of indigenousrights, so much so that she was eventually adopted as a Mohawk clanmother. (She spent the last years of her life in the home of her devoted son-in-law, L. Frank Baum, author of the Oz books – a series of a dozen volumes in which, as many have pointed out, there are queens, goodwitches and princesses, but not a single legitimate male ﬁgure of authority.)In Woman, Church, and State (1893), Gage posited the universal existenceof an early form of society ‘known as the Matriarchate or Mother-rule’,where institutions of government and religion were modelled on therelationship of mother to child in the household. 
Or consider one of Sigmund Freud’s two favourite students: Otto Gross,an anarchist who in the years before the First World War developed a theorythat the superego was in fact patriarchy and needed to be destroyed so as tounleash the benevolent, matriarchal collective unconscious, which he sawas the hidden but still-living residue of the Neolithic. (This he set out toaccomplish largely through the use of drugs and polyamorous sexualrelationships; Gross’s work is now largely remembered for its inﬂuence onFreud’s other favourite student, Carl Jung, who kept the idea of thecollective unconscious but rejected Gross’s political conclusions.) After theGreat War, Nazis began to take up the same story of the ‘Aryan’ invasionsfrom the exact opposite perspective, representing the imagined, patriarchalinvaders as the ancestors of their master race. 
With such intense politicization of what were obviously fanciful readingsof prehistory, it’s hardly surprising that the topic of ‘primitive matriarchy’became something of an embarrassment – the intellectual equivalent of ano-go zone – for subsequent generations. But it’s hard to avoid theimpression something else is going on here. The degree of erasure has beenextraordinary, and far more than is warranted by mere suspicion of anoverstated or outdated theory. Among academics today, belief in primitivematriarchy is treated as a kind of intellectual offence, almost on a par with‘scientiﬁc racism’, and its exponents have been written out of history: Gagefrom the history of feminism, Gross from that of psychology (despiteinventing such concepts as introversion and extroversion, and havingworked closely with everyone from Franz Kafka and the Berlin Dadaists toMax Weber).
This is odd. After all, a century or so does seem more than enough timefor the dust to settle. Why is the matter still so shrouded in taboo?
Much of this present-day sensitivity stems from a backlash against thelegacy of a Lithuanian-American archaeologist named Marija Gimbutas. Inthe 1960s and 1970s, Gimbutas was a leading authority on the laterprehistory of eastern Europe. Nowadays, she is often represented as just asmuch of an oddball as psychiatric rebels like Otto Gross, accused of havingattempted to revive the most ridiculous of old Victorian fantasies in modernguise. This is not only untrue (very few of those who dismiss her workseem to have actually read any of it), but it has created a situation wherescholars ﬁnd it difﬁcult even to speculate as to how hierarchy andexploitation came to take root in the domestic sphere – unless one wants to return to Rousseau, and the simplistic notion that settled farming somehowautomatically generated the power of husbands over wives and fathers overchildren. 
In fact, if you read the books of Gimbutas – such as The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe (1982) – you quickly realize that their author wasattempting to do something which, until then, only men had been allowed todo: to craft a grand narrative for the origins of Eurasian civilization. She didso taking as her building blocks the very kind of ‘culture areas’ wediscussed in the last chapter and using them to argue that, in some ways(though certainly not all), the old Victorian story about goddess.worshipping farmers and Aryan invaders was actually true.
Gimbutas was largely concerned with trying to understand the broadcontours of a cultural tradition she referred to as ‘Old Europe’, a world ofsettled Neolithic villages centring on the Balkans and eastern Mediterranean(but also extending further north), in which, as Gimbutas saw it, men andwomen were equally valued, and differences of wealth and status weresharply circumscribed. Old Europe, by her estimation, endured fromroughly 7000 BC to 3500 BC – which is, again, quite a respectable period oftime. She believed these societies to be essentially peaceful, and argued thatthey shared a common pantheon under the tutelage of a supreme goddess,whose cult is attested in many hundreds of female ﬁgurines – some depictedwith masks – found in Neolithic settlements, from the Middle East to theBalkans.7 

According to Gimbutas, ‘Old Europe’ came to a catastrophic end in thethird millennium BC, when the Balkans were overrun by a migration ofcattle-keeping peoples – the so-called ‘kurgan’ folk – originating on thePontic steppe, north of the Black Sea. Kurgan refers to the most archaeologically recognizable feature of these groups: earthen tumuliheaped over the graves of (typically male) warriors, buried with weaponsand ornaments of gold, and with extravagant sacriﬁces of animals andoccasionally also human ‘retainers’. All these features attested valuesantithetical to the communitarian ethos of Old Europe. The incominggroups were aristocratic and ‘androcratic’ (i.e., patriarchal), and wereextremely warlike. Gimbutas considered them responsible for the westwardspread of Indo-European languages, the establishment of new kinds ofsocieties based on the radical subordination of women, and the elevation ofwarriors to a ruling caste. 
As we’ve noted, all this bore a certain resemblance to the old Victorianfantasies – but there were key differences. The older version was rooted inan evolutionary anthropology that assumed matriarchy was the originalcondition of humankind because, at ﬁrst, people supposedly didn’tunderstand physiological paternity and assumed women were single.handedly responsible for producing babies. This meant, of course, thathunter-gatherer communities before them should be just as matrilineal andmatriarchal, if not more so, than early farmers – something many did indeedargue from ﬁrst principles, despite a complete lack of any sort of evidence.Gimbutas, though, was not proposing anything of this sort: she was arguingfor women’s autonomy and ritual priority in the Middle Eastern andEuropean Neolithic. Yet by the 1990s many of her ideas had become acharter for ecofeminists, New Age religions and a host of other socialmovements; in turn, they inspired a slew of popular books, ranging from thephilosophical to the ridiculous – and in the process became entangled withsome of the more extravagant older Victorian ideas.
Given all this, many archaeologists and historians concluded thatGimbutas was muddying the waters between scientiﬁc research and popliterature. Before long, she was being accused of just about everything theacademy could think to throw at her: from cherry-picking evidence tofailing to keep up with methodological advances; accusations of reversesexism; or that she was indulging in ‘myth-making’. She was even subjectto the supreme insult of public psychoanalysis, as leading academic journalspublished articles suggesting her theories about the displacement of OldEurope were basically phantasmagorical projections of her own tumultuouslife experience, Gimbutas having ﬂed her mother country, Lithuania, at theclose of the Second World War in the wake of foreign invasions.8 

Mercifully, perhaps, Gimbutas herself, who died in 1994, was not aroundto see most of this. But that also meant she was never able to respond.Some, maybe most of these criticisms had truth in them – though similarcriticisms could no doubt be made of pretty much any archaeologist whomakes a sweeping historical argument. Gimbutas’s arguments involvedmyth-making of a sort, which in part explains this wholesale takedown ofher work by the academic community. But when male scholars engage insimilar myth-making – and, as we have seen, they frequently do – they notonly go unchallenged but often win prestigious literary prizes and havehonorary lectures created in their name. Arguably Gimbutas was seen as meddling in, and quite consciously subverting, a genre of grand narrativethat had been (and still is) entirely dominated by male writers such asourselves. Yet her reward was not a literary prize, or even a place amongthe revered ancestors of archaeology; it was near-universal posthumousviliﬁcation, or, even worse, becoming an object of dismissive contempt.
At least, until quite recently.
Over the last few years, the analysis of ancient DNA – unavailable inGimbutas’s time – has led a number of leading archaeologists to concedethat at least one signiﬁcant part of her reconstruction was probably right. Ifthese new arguments, put forward on the basis of population genetics, areeven broadly correct, then there really was an expansion of herding peoplesfrom the grasslands north of the Black Sea around the time Gimbutasbelieved it to have happened: the third millennium BC. Some scholars are even arguing that massive migrations took place out of the Eurasian steppeat that time, leading to population replacement and perhaps the spread ofIndo-European languages across large swathes of central Europe, just asGimbutas envisaged. Others are far more cautious; but either way, afterdecades of virtual silence, people are suddenly talking about such issues,and hence about Gimbutas’s work, again.9 

So what about the other half of Gimbutas’s argument, that EarlyNeolithic societies were relatively free of ranks and hierarchies? Beforeeven beginning to answer this question, we need to clear up a fewmisconceptions. Gimbutas in fact never argued outright for the existence ofNeolithic matriarchies. Indeed, the term seems to mean very different thingsto different authors. Insofar as ‘matriarchy’ describes a society wherewomen hold a preponderance of formal political positions, one can indeedsay this is exceedingly rare in human history. There are plenty of examplesof individual women wielding real executive power, leading armies orcreating laws, but few if any societies in which only women are normallyexpected to wield executive power or lead armies or create laws. Evenstrong queens like Elizabeth I of England, the Dowager Empress of Chinaor Ranavalona I of Madagascar did not primarily appoint other women tobe their chief advisors, commanders, judges and ofﬁcials.
In any case, another term – ‘gynarchy’, or ‘gynaecocracy’ – describes thepolitical rule of women. The word ‘matriarchy’ means something ratherdifferent. There is a certain logic here: ‘patriarchy’, after all, refers notprimarily to the fact that men wield public ofﬁce, but ﬁrst and foremost to the authority of patriarchs, that is, male heads of household – an authoritywhich then acts as a symbolic model for, and economic basis of, malepower in other ﬁelds of social life. Matriarchy might refer to an equivalentsituation, in which the role of mothers in the household similarly becomes amodel for, and economic basis of, female authority in other aspects of life(which doesn’t necessarily imply dominance in a violent or exclusionarysense), where women as a result hold a preponderance of overall day-to-day power.
Looked at this way, matriarchies are real enough. Kandiaronk himselfarguably lived in one. In his day, Iroquoian-speaking groups such as theWendat lived in towns that were made up of longhouses of ﬁve or sixfamilies. Each longhouse was run by a council of women – the men wholived there did not have a parallel council of their own – whose memberscontrolled all the key stockpiles of clothing, tools and food. The politicalsphere in which Kandiaronk himself moved was perhaps the only one inWendat society where women did not predominate, and even so thereexisted women’s councils which held veto power over any decision of themale councils. On this deﬁnition, the Pueblo nations such as Hopi and Zuñimight also qualify as matriarchies, while the Minangkabau, a Muslimpeople of Sumatra, describe themselves as matriarchal for exactly the same reasons.10 

True, such matriarchal arrangements are somewhat unusual – at least inthe ethnographic record, which covers roughly the last 200 years. But onceit’s clear that such arrangements can exist, we have no particular reason toexclude the possibility that they were more common in Neolithic times, orto assume that Gimbutas – by searching for them there – was doingsomething inherently fanciful or misguided. As with any hypothesis, it’smore a matter of weighing up the evidence.
Which takes us back to Çatalhöyük. 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER WHAT LIFE IN THE WORLD’S MOST FAMOUS NEOLITHIC TOWN MIGHT HAVE ACTUALLY BEEN LIKE 
Recently, a number of discoveries among the miniature art of Çatalhöyükappear to show that the female form was a special focus of ritual attention,skilled artisanship and symbolic reﬂection on life and death. One is a clay ﬁgure with typically corpulent female front, transitioning at the back to acarefully modelled skeleton via arms that look emaciated. Its head, nowlost, was ﬁxed into a hole at the top. Another female ﬁgurine has a tinycavity in the centre of her back, into which a single seed from a wild planthad been placed. And within a domestic platform of the sort used forburials, excavators found one particularly revealing and exquisitely carvedlimestone ﬁgure of a woman. Its detailed rendering clariﬁes an aspect of themore common ﬁgures made in clay: the sagging breasts, drooping belly androlls of fat appear to signify not pregnancy, as once was believed, but age.11 

Such ﬁndings suggest that the more ubiquitous female ﬁgurines, whileclearly not all objects of worship, weren’t necessarily all dolls or toys either.Goddesses? Probably not. But quite possibly matriarchs of some sort, theirforms revealing an interest in female elders. And no equivalentrepresentations of male elders have been found. Of course, this doesn’tmean we should ignore the many other Neolithic ﬁgurines that havepossible phallic attributes, or mixed male-female attributes, or that are soschematic we shouldn’t really try to identify them as male or female, oreven as clearly human. Similarly, the occasional links between Neolithicﬁgurines and masking – attested both in the Middle East and easternEurope12 – may relate to occasions or performances where such categoricaldistinctions were deliberately blurred, or even inverted (not unlike, say, themasquerades of the Paciﬁc Coast of North America, where the deities andthose impersonating them were almost invariably male).
There is no evidence that Çatalhöyük’s female inhabitants enjoyed betterstandards of living than its male ones. Detailed studies of human teeth andskeletons reveal a basic parity of diet and health, as does the ritual treatmentof male and female bodies in death.13 Yet the point remains that there existno similarly elaborate or highly crafted depictions of male forms in theportable art of Çatalhöyük. Wall decoration is another matter. Wherecoherent scenes emerge from the surviving murals, they are mainlyconcerned with the hunting and teasing of game animals such as boar, deer,bear and bulls. The participants are men and boys, apparently depicted indifferent stages of life, or perhaps entering those stages through theinitiatory trials of the chase. Some of these spritely ﬁgures wear leopardskins; in one deer-baiting scene, all have beards.
One thing to emerge clearly from the newer investigations at Çatalhöyükis the way in which household organization permeates almost every aspect of social life. Despite the considerable size and density of the built-up area,there is no evidence for central authority. Each household appears more orless a world unto itself – a discrete locus of storage, production andconsumption. Each also seems to have held a signiﬁcant degree of controlover its own rituals, especially where treatment of the dead was concerned,although ritual experts may of course have moved between them. While it’sunclear what social rules and habits were responsible for maintaining theautonomy of households, what seems evident is that these rules werelearned mainly within the household itself; not just through its ceremonies,but also its micro-routines of cooking, cleaning ﬂoors, resurfacing wallswith plaster, and so on.14 All this is vaguely reminiscent of the NorthwestCoast, where society was a collection of great houses, except that theinhabitants of these Neolithic houses show no sign of being divided intoranks. 
The residents of Çatalhöyük seem to have placed great value on routine.We see this most clearly in the fastidious reproduction of domestic layoutsover time. Individual houses were typically in use for between ﬁfty and 100years, after which they were carefully dismantled and ﬁlled in to makefoundations for superseding houses. Clay wall went up on clay wall, in thesame location, for century after century, over periods reaching up to a fullmillennium. Still more astonishing, smaller features such as mud-builthearths, ovens, storage bins and platforms often follow the same repetitivepatterns of construction, over similarly long periods. Even particular imagesand ritual installations come back, again and again, in different renderingsbut the same locations, often widely separated in time.
Was Çatalhöyük, then, an ‘egalitarian society’? There is no sign of anyself-conscious egalitarian ideal in the sense of, say, a concern withuniformity in the art, architecture or material culture; but neither are theremany explicit signs of rank. Nonetheless, as individual houses built uphistories, they also appear to have acquired a degree of cumulative prestige.This is reﬂected in a certain density of hunting trophies, burial platformsand obsidian – a dark volcanic glass, obtained from sources in the highlandsof Cappadocia, some 125 miles north. The authority of long-lived housesseems consistent with the idea that elders, and perhaps elder women inparticular, held positions of inﬂuence. But the more prestigious householdsare distributed among the less, and do not coalesce into eliteneighbourhoods. In terms of gender relations, we can acknowledge a degree of symmetry, or at least complementarity. In pictorial art, masculine themesdo not encompass the feminine, nor vice versa. If anything, the twodomains seem to be kept apart, in different sectors of dwellings.
What were the underlying realities of social life and labour atÇatalhöyük? Perhaps the most striking thing about all this art and ritual isthat it makes almost no reference to agriculture. As we’ve noted, domesticcereals (wheat and barley) and livestock (sheep and goats) were far moreimportant than wild resources in terms of nutrition. We know this becauseof organic remains recovered in quantity from every house. Yet for 1,000years the cultural life of the community remained stubbornly orientedaround the worlds of hunting and foraging. At this point, one has to askhow complete our picture of life at Çatalhöyük really is and where thelargest gaps may lie. 
HOW THE SEASONALITY OF SOCIAL LIFE IN EARLY FARMING COMMUNITIES MIGHT HAVE WORKED 
Only something like 5 per cent of Neolithic Çatalhöyük has beenexcavated.15 Soundings and surveys offer no particular reason to believethat other parts of the town were substantially different, but it’s a reminderof how little we really know, and that we also have to think about what ismissing from the archaeological record. For instance, it is clear that houseﬂoors were regularly swept clean, so the distribution of artefacts aroundthem is far from a straightforward representation of past activities, whichcan only be reliably tracked through tiny fragments and residue embeddedin the plaster.16 Traces have also been found of reed mats that covered living surfaces and furnishings, further disturbing the picture. We don’tnecessarily know everything that was happening in the houses, or perhapseven half of it – or, indeed, how much time was actually spent living inthese cramped and peculiar structures at all.
In considering this, it’s worth taking a broader look at the site ofÇatalhöyük in relation to its ancient surroundings, which archaeologicalscience allows us to reconstruct, at least in outline. Çatalhöyük was situatedin an area of wetlands (whence all the mud and clay) seasonally ﬂooded bythe Çar.amba River, which split its course as it entered the Konya Plain.Swamps would have surrounded the site for much of the year, interspersedwith raised areas of dry land. Winters were cold and damp, summers oppressively hot. From spring to autumn, sheep and goats would have beenmoved between areas of pasture within the plain, and sometimes furtherinto the highlands. Arable crops were most likely sown late in the spring onthe receding ﬂoodplain of the Çar.amba, where they could ripen in as littleas three months, with harvesting and processing in the late summer: fast-growing grains, in the season of Adonis.17 

While all these tasks may have taken place quite close to the town, theywill inevitably have involved a periodic dispersal and reconﬁguration ofworking arrangements and of general social affairs. And, as the rites ofAdonis remind us, another kind of social life altogether may have existedon the rooftops. It is in fact quite likely that what we are seeing in thesurviving remains of Çatalhöyük’s built environment are largely the socialarrangements prevalent in winter, with their intense and distinctiveceremonialism focused upon hunting and the veneration of the dead. At thattime of year, with the harvest in, the organization required for agriculturallabour would have given way to a different type of social reality as thecommunity’s life shrank back towards its houses, just as its herds of sheepand goats shrank back into the conﬁnes of their pens.
Seasonal variations of social structure18 were alive and well at Çatalhöyük, and these carefully balanced alternations seem central tounderstanding why the town endured. An impressive degree of materialequality prevailed in the everyday exchanges of family life, within andbetween houses. Yet at the same time, hierarchy developed to slowerrhythms, played out in rituals that joined the living to the dead. Shepherdingand cultivation surely involved a strict division of labour, to safeguard theannual crop and protect the herds – but if so it found little space in theceremonial life of the household, which drew its energy from older sources,more Adonis than Demeter. 
A certain controversy has arisen, however, concerning just where thepeople of Çatalhöyük planted their crops. At ﬁrst, microscopic studies ofcereal remains suggested a dry-land location. Given the known extent ofancient swamps in the Konya basin, this would imply that arable ﬁelds werelocated at least eight miles from the town, which hardly seems plausible inthe absence of donkeys or ox carts (remember, cattle were not yetdomesticated in this region, let alone harnessed to anything). Subsequentanalyses support a more local setting, on the alluvial soils of the Çar.ambaﬂoodplain.19 The distinction is important for a variety of reasons, not just ecological but also historical, even political, because how we picture itspractical realities has direct implications for how we view the socialconsequences of Neolithic farming.
We must take an even broader perspective to see exactly why. 
ON BREAKING APART THE FERTILE CRESCENT 
When Çatalhöyük was ﬁrst investigated, in the 1960s, the striking discoveryof houses lined with cattle skulls led many to assume, quite reasonably, thatthe plain of Konya was an early cradle of animal domestication. These daysit is known that cattle (and boar) were ﬁrst domesticated 1,000 years beforeÇatalhöyük was founded, and in another location altogether: around theupper reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates valleys, which lie further east intoAsia, within the area known as the Fertile Crescent. It was from that generaldirection that the founders of Çatalhöyük obtained the basis of their farmingeconomy, including domestic cereals, pulses, sheep and goats. But theydidn’t adopt domestic cattle or pigs. Why not?
Since no environmental obstacles were present, one has to assume anelement of cultural refusal here. The best contender for an explanation isalso the most obvious. As Çatalhöyük’s art and ritual suggests, wild cattleand boar were highly valued as prey, and probably had been for as long asanyone could remember. In terms of prestige, there was much to be lost,perhaps especially for men, by the prospect of surrounding these dangerousanimals with more docile, domestic varieties. Allowing cattle to remainexclusively in their ancient wild form – a big beast, but also lean, fast andhighly impressive – also meant keeping intact a certain sort of humansociety. Accordingly, cattle remained wild and glamorous until around 6000
20BC. 
So, what exactly is, or was, the Fertile Crescent? First, it’s important tonote that this is a completely modern concept, the origins of which are asmuch geopolitical as environmental. The term Fertile Crescent wasinvented in the nineteenth century, when Europe’s imperial powers werecarving up the Middle East according to their own strategic interests. Partlybecause of the close ties between archaeology, ancient history and themodern institutions of empire, the term became widely adopted amongresearchers to describe an area from the eastern shores of the Mediterranean (modern Palestine, Israel and Lebanon) to the foothills of the Zagros Mountains (roughly the Iran–Iraq border), crossing parts of Syria, Turkeyand Iraq on the way. Now it is only prehistorians who still use it, to indicatethe region where farming began: a roughly crescent-shaped belt of arablelands bounded by deserts and mountains.21 

Yet in ecological terms, it’s really not one crescent but two – or no doubteven more, depending how closely one chooses to look. At the end of thelast glacial period, around 10,000 BC, this region developed in two clearlydistinct directions. Going with the topography, we can discern an ‘uplandcrescent’ and a ‘lowland crescent’. The upland crescent follows the foothillsof the Taurus and Zagros Mountains, running north of the modern borderbetween Syria and Turkey. For foragers at the end of the last Ice Age, itwould have been something of an open frontier; an expanding belt of oak-pistachio forest and game-rich prairie intersected by river valleys.22 The lowland crescent to the south was characterized by Pistacia woodlands, aswell as tracts of fertile terrain bound tightly to river systems or to the shoresof lakes and artesian springs, beyond which lay deserts and barrenplateaus.23 

Between 10,000 and 8000 BC, foraging societies in the ‘upland’ and‘lowland’ sectors of the Fertile Crescent underwent marked transformations, but in quite different directions. The differences cannoteasily be expressed in terms of modes of subsistence or habitation. In bothregions, in fact, we ﬁnd a complex mosaic of human settlement: villages,hamlets, seasonal camps and centres of ritual and ceremonial activitymarked out by impressive public buildings. Both regions, too, haveproduced varying degrees of evidence for plant cultivation and livestockmanagement, within a broader spectrum of hunting and foraging activities.Yet there are also cultural differences, some so striking as to suggest aprocess of schismogenesis, of the sort we described in the previous chapter.It might even be argued that, after the last Ice Age, the ecological frontierbetween ‘lowland’ and ‘upland’ Fertile Crescent also became a culturalfrontier with zones of relative uniformity on either side, distinguishedalmost as sharply as the ‘Protestant foragers’ and ‘ﬁsher kings’ of thePaciﬁc Coast. 
In the uplands, there was a striking turn towards hierarchy among settledhunter-foragers, most dramatically attested at the megalithic centre ofGöbekli Tepe and at nearby sites like that recently discovered at KarahanTepe. In the lowlands of the Euphrates and Jordan valleys, by contrast, such megalithic monuments are absent, and Neolithic societies followed adistinct but equally precocious path of change, which we will shortlydescribe. What’s more, these two adjacent families of societies – let’s callthem ‘lowlanders’ and ‘uplanders’ – were well acquainted. We know thisbecause they traded durable materials with each other over long distances,among them the same materials, in fact, that we found circulating asvaluables on the West Coast of North America: obsidian and minerals from the mountains, and mollusc shells from the coasts. Obsidian from theTurkish highlands ﬂowed south, and shells (perhaps used as currency)ﬂowed north from the shores of the Red Sea, ensuring that uplanders andlowlanders stayed in touch.24 

The routes of this prehistoric trade circuit contracted as they progressedsouthwards into less evenly populated areas, starting at the Syrian bend ofthe Euphrates, winding through the Damascus basin and down into theJordan valley. This route formed the so-called ‘Levantine Corridor’. Andthe lowlanders who lived here were devoted craft specialists and traders.Each hamlet seems to have developed its own expertise (stone-grinding,bead-carving, shell-processing and so on), and industries were oftenassociated with special ‘cult buildings’ or seasonal lodges, pointing to thecontrol of such skills by guilds or secret societies. By the ninth millennium BC, larger settlements had developed along the principal trade routes.Lowland foragers occupied fertile pockets of land among the drainages ofthe Jordan valley, using trade wealth to support increasingly large, settledpopulations. Sites of impressive scale sprang up in such propitiouslocations, some, such as Jericho and Basta, approaching ten hectares insize.25 

To understand the importance of trade in this process is to appreciate thatthe lowland crescent was a landscape of intimate contrasts and conjunctures(very similar, in this respect, to California). There were constantopportunities for foragers to exchange complementary products – whichincluded foods, medicines, drugs and cosmetics – since the local growthcycles of wild resources were staggered by sharp differences in climate andtopography.26 Farming itself seems to have started in precisely this way, asone of so many ‘niche’ activities or local forms of specialization. Thefounder crops of early agriculture – among them emmer wheat, einkorn,barley and rye – were not domesticated in a single ‘core’ area (as oncesupposed), but at different stops along the Levantine Corridor, scattered 
from the Jordan valley to the Syrian Euphrates, and perhaps further north aswell.27 



At higher altitudes, in the upland crescent, we ﬁnd some of the earliestevidence for the management of livestock (sheep and goats in western Iran,cattle too in eastern Anatolia), incorporated into seasonal rounds of huntingand foraging.28 Cereal cultivation began in a similar way, as a fairly minorsupplement to economies based mainly on wild resources: nuts, berries,legumes and other readily accessible foodstuffs. Cultivation, however, israrely just about calories. Cereal production also brought people together innew ways to perform communal tasks, mostly repetitive, labour-intensiveand no doubt freighted with symbolic meaning; and the resulting foodswere incorporated into their ceremonial lives. At the site of Jerf el-Ahmar,on the banks of the Syrian Euphrates – where upland and lowland sectors ofthe Fertile Crescent converge – the storage and processing of grain wasassociated less with ordinary dwellings than with subterranean lodges,entered from an opening in the roof and suffused with ritual associations.29 

Before exploring some further contrasts between lowlanders anduplanders, it seems important to consider in a little more detail what thesevery earliest kinds of farming were actually like. To do this, we have to godeeper into the process of domestication. 
ON SLOW WHEAT, AND POP THEORIES OF HOW WE BECAMEFARMERS 
In crops, domestication is what happens when plants under cultivation losefeatures that allow them to reproduce in the wild. Among the mostimportant is the facility to disperse seed without human assistance. Inwheat, seeds growing on the stalk are contained by tiny aerodynamiccapsules known as spikelets. As wild wheat ripens, the connection betweenspikelet and stem (an element called the rachis) shatters. The spikelets freethemselves and fall to the ground. Their spiky ends penetrate the soil, deepenough for at least some seed to survive and grow (the other ends projectupwards, equipped with bristle-like awns to deter birds, rodents andbrowsing animals). 
In domestic varieties, these aids to survival are lost. A genetic mutationtakes place, switching off the mechanism for spontaneous seed dispersaland turning wheat from a hardy survivor into a hopeless dependant. Unableto separate from its mother plant, the rachis becomes a locus of attachment.Instead of spreading out to take on the big bad world, the spikelets stayrigidly ﬁxed to the top part of the stem (the ‘ear’). And there they remain,until someone comes along to harvest them, or until they rot, or are eaten byanimals. So how did these genetic and behavioural changes in crops comeabout, how long did it take, and what had to happen in human societies tomake them possible? Historians sometimes like to turn this question on itshead. It is wheat, they remind us, that has domesticated people, just as muchas people ever domesticated wheat.
Yuval Harari waxes eloquent on this point, asking us to think ‘for amoment about the Agricultural Revolution from the viewpoint of wheat’.Ten thousand years ago, he points out, wheat was just another form of wildgrass, of no special signiﬁcance; but within the space of a few millennia itwas growing over large parts of the planet. How did it happen? The answer,according to Harari, is that wheat did it by manipulating Homo sapiens to its advantage. ‘This ape’, he writes, ‘had been living a fairly comfortablelife hunting and gathering until about 10,000 years ago, but then began toinvest more and more effort in cultivating wheat.’ If wheat didn’t likestones, humans had to clear them from their ﬁelds; if wheat didn’t want toshare its space with other plants, people were obliged to labour under thehot sun weeding them out; if wheat craved water, people had to lug it fromone place to another, and so on.30 

There’s something ineluctable about all this. But only if we accept thepremise that it does in fact make sense to look at the whole process ‘fromthe viewpoint of wheat’. On reﬂection, why should we? Humans are verylarge-brained and intelligent primates and wheat is, well … a sort of grass.Of course, there are non-human species that have, in a sense, domesticatedthemselves – the house mouse and sparrow are among them, and so tooprobably the dog, all found, incidentally, in Early Neolithic villages of theMiddle East. It’s also undoubtedly true that, over the long term, ours is aspecies that has become enslaved to its crops: wheat, rice, millet and cornfeed the world, and it’s hard to envisage modern life without them.
But to make sense of the beginnings of Neolithic farming, we surely needto try and see it from the perspective of the Palaeolithic, not of the present, and still less from the viewpoint of some imaginary race of bourgeois ape-men. Of course, this is harder to do, but the alternative is to slip back intothe realms of myth-making: retelling the past as a ‘just-so’ story, whichmakes our present situation seem somehow inevitable or preordained.Harari’s retelling is appealing, we suggest, not because it’s based on anyevidence, but because we’ve heard it a thousand times before, just with adifferent cast of characters. In fact, many of us have been hearing it frominfancy. Once again, we’re back in the Garden of Eden. Except now, it’s nota wily serpent who tricks humanity into sampling the forbidden fruit ofknowledge. It’s the fruit itself (i.e. the cereal grains).
We already know how this one goes. Humans were once living a ‘fairlycomfortable life’, subsisting from the blessings of Nature, but then we madeour most fatal mistake. Lured by the prospect of a still easier life – ofsurplus and luxury, of living like gods – we had to go and tamper with thatharmonious State of Nature, and thus unwittingly turned ourselves intoslaves. 
What happens if we put aside this fable and consider what botanists,geneticists and archaeologists have found out in the past few decades? Let’sfocus on wheat and barley.
After the last Ice Age, these particular crops were among the ﬁrst to bedomesticated, along with lentils, ﬂax, peas, chickpeas and bitter vetch. Aswe’ve noted, this process occurred in various different parts of the FertileCrescent, rather than a single centre. Wild varieties of some of these cropsgrow there today, giving researchers the chance to make direct observationsabout how those plants behave, and even to reconstruct certain aspects ofthe technical process that led, 10,000 years ago, to domestication. Armedwith such knowledge, they can also examine actual remains of ancientseeds and other plant remains, recovered in the many hundreds fromarchaeological sites in the same region. Scientists can then compare thebiological process of domestication (reproduced under technologicalconditions similar to those of Neolithic cultivation) with the actual processthat took place in prehistoric times and see how they match up.
Once cultivation became widespread in Neolithic societies, we mightexpect to ﬁnd evidence of a relatively quick or at least continuous transitionfrom wild to domestic forms of cereals (which is exactly what terms like the‘Agricultural Revolution’ lead us to think), but in fact this is not at all what the results of archaeological science show. And despite the Middle Easternsetting, those ﬁndings do not add up to anything remotely resembling aGarden of Eden-type story about how humans haplessly stumbled their wayinto a Faustian pact with wheat. Just how far we are (or should be) fromthat kind of story was already clear to researchers some decades ago, oncethey began comparing actual prehistoric rates of crop domestication tothose achieved under experimental conditions.
Experiments of this kind with wild wheat were ﬁrst undertaken in the1980s.31 What they showed was that the key genetic mutation leading tocrop domestication could be achieved in as little as twenty to thirty years, orat most 200 years, using simple harvesting techniques like reaping with ﬂintsickles or uprooting by hand. All it would have taken, then, is for humans tofollow the cues provided by the crops themselves. That meant harvestingafter they began to ripen, doing it in ways that left the grain on the stem
(e.g. cutting or pulling, as opposed to beating grain straight off the ear witha paddle), sowing new seed on virgin soil (away from wild competitors),learning from errors, and repeating the winning formula next year. Forforagers seasoned in the harvesting of wild crops, these changes need nothave posed major logistical or conceptual challenges. And there may alsohave been other good reasons to harvest wild cereals in this manner, besidesobtaining food.
Harvesting by sickle yields straw as well as grain. Today we considerstraw a by-product of cereal-farming, the primary purpose being to producefood. But archaeological evidence suggests things started the other wayround.32 Human populations in the Middle East began settling inpermanent villages long before cereals became a major component of theirdiets.33 In doing so, they found new uses for the stalks of wild grasses;these included fuel for lighting ﬁres, and the temper that transformed mudand clay from so much friable matter into a vital tectonic resource, used tobuild houses, ovens, storage bins and other ﬁxed structures. Straw couldalso be used to make baskets, clothing, matting and thatch. As peopleintensiﬁed the harvesting of wild grasses for straw (either by sickle orsimply uprooting), they also produced one of the key conditions for some ofthese grasses to lose their natural mechanisms of seed dispersal.
Now here’s the key point: if crops, rather than humans, had been settingthe pace, these two processes would have gone hand in hand, leading to thedomestication of large-seeded grasses within a few decades. Wheat would have gained its human handmaidens, and humans would have gained aplant resource that could be efﬁciently harvested with little loss of seed andthat was eminently storable, but that also required much greater outlays oflabour in the form of land management and the post-harvesting work ofthreshing and winnowing (a process which occurs naturally in wild cereals).Within a few human generations, the Faustian pact between people andcrops would have been sealed. But here again, the evidence ﬂatlycontradicts these expectations.
In fact, the latest research shows that the process of plant domesticationin the Fertile Crescent was not fully completed until much later: as much as3,000 years after the cultivation of wild cereals ﬁrst began.34 (Once again,to get a sense of the scale here, think: the time between the putative TrojanWar and today.) And while some modern historians may allow themselvesthe luxury of disposing with ‘a few short millennia’ here or there, we canhardly extend this attitude to the prehistoric actors whose lives we aretrying to understand. At this point, you might reasonably ask what we meanby ‘cultivation’, and how we can possibly know when it began, if it didn’tlead to clear changes in the reproductive behaviour of wild plants? Theanswers lie in weeds (and in research methods dreamed up in an inventivesub-branch of archaeology, known as ‘archaeobotany’). 
WHY NEOLITHIC FARMING TOOK SO LONG TO EVOLVE,AND DID NOT, AS ROUSSEAU IMAGINED, INVOLVE THEENCLOSURE OF FIXED FIELDS 
Since the early 2000s, archaeobotanists have been studying a phenomenonknown as ‘pre-domestication cultivation’. Cultivation in general refers tothe work done by humans to improve the life chances of favoured crops,whether these be wild or domestic. This usually involves, at minimum,clearing and tilling the soil. Soil preparation induces changes in the size andshape of wild cereal grains, though such changes need not lead todomestication (basically they just get bigger). It also attracts other ﬂora thatﬂourish in disturbed soils, including arable weeds such as clover, fenugreek,gromwell and indeed members of the colourful crowfoot family (genusAdonis!), quick to ﬂower and just as quick to die.
Since the 1980s, researchers have accumulated statistical evidence fromprehistoric sites in the Middle East, analysing this evidence for changes over time in grain size and proportions of arable weed ﬂora. Samples nownumber in the many tens of thousands. What they show is that, in certainparts of the region such as northern Syria, the cultivation of wild cerealsdates back at least to 10,000 BC.35 Yet in these same regions, the biologicalprocess of crop domestication (including the crucial switch-over frombrittle rachis to tough) was not completed until closer to 7000 BC – that is roughly ten times as long as it need have taken – if, that is, humans reallyhad stumbled blindly into the whole process, following the trajectorydictated by changes in their crops.36 To be clear: that’s 3,000 years ofhuman history, far too long to constitute an ‘Agricultural Revolution’ oreven to be considered some kind of transitional state on the road to farming.
To us, with our Platonic prejudices, all this looks like a very long andunnecessary delay, but clearly it was not experienced that way by people inNeolithic times. We need to understand this 3,000-year period as animportant phase of human history in its own right. It’s a phase marked byforagers moving in and out of cultivation – and as we’ve seen, there’snothing unusual or anomalous about this ﬂirting and tinkering with thepossibilities of farming, in just the ways Plato would have despised – but inno way enslaving themselves to the needs of their crops or herds. So long asit didn’t become too onerous, cultivation was just one of many ways inwhich early settled communities managed their environments. Separatingwild and domestic plant populations need not have been a major concernfor them, even if it appears that way to us.37 

On reﬂection, this approach makes perfectly good sense. Cultivatingdomestic cereals, as the ‘afﬂuent’ foragers of the Paciﬁc Coast knew well,is enormously hard work.38 Serious farming meant serious soilmaintenance and weed clearance. It meant threshing and winnowing afterharvest. All these activities would have got in the way of hunting, wild foodcollection, craft production, marriages and any number of other things, notto mention storytelling, gambling, travelling and organizing masquerades.Indeed, to balance out their dietary needs and labour costs, early cultivatorsmay even have strategically chosen practices that worked against themorphological changes which signal the onset of domestication in plants.39 

This balancing act involved a special kind of cultivation, which brings usback full circle to Çatalhöyük and its wetland location. Called ‘ﬂoodretreat’, ‘ﬂood recession’ or décrue farming, it takes place on the margins ofseasonally ﬂooding lakes or rivers. Flood-retreat farming is a distinctly lackadaisical way to raise crops. The work of soil preparation is given overmostly to nature. Seasonal ﬂooding does the work of tillage, annuallysifting and refreshing the soil. As the waters recede they leave behind afertile bed of alluvial earth, where seed can be broadcast. This was gardencultivation on a small scale with no need for deforestation, weeding orirrigation, except perhaps the construction of small stone or earthen barriers(‘bunds’) to nudge the distribution of water this way or that. Areas of highgroundwater, such as the edges of artesian springs, could also be exploitedin this way.40 

In terms of labour, ﬂood-retreat farming is not only pretty light, it alsorequires little central management. Critically, such systems have a kind ofinbuilt resistance to the enclosure and measurement of land. Any givenparcel of territory might be fertile one year, and then either ﬂooded or driedout the next, so there is little incentive for long-term ownership or enclosureof ﬁxed plots. It makes little sense to set up boundary stones when theground itself is shifting underneath you. No form of human ecology is‘innately’ egalitarian, but much as Rousseau and his epigones would havebeen surprised to hear it, these early cultivation systems did not lendthemselves to the development of private property. If anything, ﬂood-retreatfarming was practically oriented towards the collective holding of land, orat least ﬂexible systems of ﬁeld reallocation.41 

Flood-retreat farming was an especially important feature of EarlyNeolithic economies in the more arid, lowland sectors of the FertileCrescent, and particularly the Levantine Corridor, where important sitesoften developed on the margins of springs or lakes (e.g. Jericho, TellAswad) or on riverbanks (e.g. Abu Hureyra, Jerf el-Ahmar). Because thedensest stands of wild grain crops actually lay in upland areas with higherrainfall, the inhabitants of such lowland sites had opportunities to isolatecultivated from wild stock, setting in motion a process of divergence anddomestication by gathering grains from the highlands and broadcastingthem in lowland, ﬂood-retreat areas. This makes the extremely longtimescale of cereal domestication more striking still. Early cultivators, itseems, were doing the minimum amount of subsistence work needed to stayin their given locations, which they occupied for reasons other thanfarming: hunting, foraging, ﬁshing, trading and more. 
ON WOMAN, THE SCIENTIST 
Rejecting a Garden of Eden-type narrative for the origins of farming alsomeans rejecting, or at least questioning, the gendered assumptions lurkingbehind that narrative.42 Apart from being a story about the loss ofprimordial innocence, the Book of Genesis is also one of history’s mostenduring charters for the hatred of women, rivalled only (in the Westerntradition) by the prejudices of Greek authors like Hesiod, or for that matterPlato. It is Eve, after all, who proves too weak to resist the exhortations ofthe crafty serpent and is ﬁrst to bite the forbidden fruit, because she is theone who desires knowledge and wisdom. Her punishment (and that of allwomen following her) is to bear children in severe pain and live under therule of her husband, whose own destiny is to subsist by the sweat of hisbrow. 
When today’s writers speculate about ‘wheat domesticating humans’ (asopposed to ‘humans domesticating wheat’), what they are really doing isreplacing a question about concrete scientiﬁc (human) achievements withsomething rather more mystical. In this view, we’re not asking questionsabout who might actually have been doing all the intellectual and practicalwork of manipulating wild plants: exploring their properties in differentsoils and water regimes; experimenting with harvesting techniques,accumulating observations about the effects these all have on growth,reproduction and nutrition; debating the social implications. Instead, weﬁnd ourselves waxing lyrical about the temptations of forbidden fruits andmusing on the unforeseen consequences of adopting a technology(agriculture) that Jared Diamond has characterized – again, with biblicalovertones – as ‘the worst mistake in the history of the human race’.43 

Consciously or not, it is the contributions of women that get written outof such accounts. Harvesting wild plants and turning them into food,medicine and complex structures like baskets or clothing is almosteverywhere a female activity, and may be gendered female even whenpractised by men. This is not quite an anthropological universal, but it’sabout as close to one as you are ever likely to get.44 Hypothetically, ofcourse, it is possible that things haven’t always been so. It’s evenconceivable that the current situation is really the result of some greatglobal switch-around of gender roles and language structures that tookplace in the last few thousand years – but one would imagine that such anepochal change would have left other traces, and no one has so much assuggested what such traces might be. True, archaeological evidence of any kind is hard to come by, because aside from charred seeds, very little ofwhat was done culturally with plants survives from prehistoric times. Butwhere evidence exists, it points to strong associations between women andplant-based knowledge as far back as one can trace such things.45 

By plant-based knowledge we don’t just mean new ways of working withwild ﬂora to produce food, spices, medicines, pigments or poisons. We alsomean the development of ﬁbre-based crafts and industries, and the moreabstract forms of knowledge these tend to generate about properties of time,space and structure. Textiles, basketry, network, matting and cordage weremost likely always developed in parallel with the cultivation of edibleplants, which also implies the development of mathematical andgeometrical knowledge that is (quite literally) intertwined with the practiceof these crafts.46 Women’s association with such knowledge extends backto some of the earliest surviving depictions of the human form: theubiquitous sculpted female ﬁgurines of the last Ice Age with their wovenheadgear, string skirts and belts made of cord.47 

There is a peculiar tendency among (male) scholars to skip over thegendered aspects of this kind of knowledge or veil it in abstractions.Consider Claude Lévi-Strauss’s famous comments on the ‘savage mind’,those ‘Neolithic scientists’ he imagined as having created a parallel route ofdiscovery to modern science, but one that started from concrete interactionswith the natural world rather than generalizing laws and theorems. Theformer method of experimentation proceeds ‘from the angle of sensiblequalities’, and according to Lévi-Strauss it ﬂowered in the Neolithic period,giving us the basis of agriculture, animal husbandry, pottery, weaving,conservation and preparation of food, etc.; while the latter mode ofdiscovery, starting from the deﬁnition of formal properties and theories,only came to fruition much more recently, with the advent of modernscientiﬁc procedures.48 

Nowhere in The Savage Mind – a book ostensibly dedicated tounderstanding that other sort of knowledge, the Neolithic ‘science of theconcrete’ – does Lévi-Strauss even mention the possibility that thoseresponsible for its ‘ﬂowering’ might, very often, have been women. 
If we take these kinds of considerations (instead of some imaginary State ofNature) as our starting point, then entirely different sorts of questions ariseabout the invention of Neolithic farming. In fact, a whole new language becomes necessary to describe it, since part of the problem withconventional approaches lies in the very terms ‘agriculture’ and‘domestication’. Agriculture is essentially about the production of food,which was just one (quite limited) aspect of the Neolithic relationshipbetween people and plants. Domestication usually implies some form ofdomination or control over the unruly forces of ‘wild nature’. Feministcritiques have already done much to unpack the gendered assumptionsbehind both concepts, neither of which seems appropriate to describe theecology of early cultivators.49 

What if we shifted the emphasis away from agriculture anddomestication to, say, botany or even gardening? At once we ﬁnd ourselvescloser to the realities of Neolithic ecology, which seem little concerned withtaming wild nature or squeezing as many calories as possible from ahandful of seed grasses. What it really seems to have been about is creatinggarden plots – artiﬁcial, often temporary habitats – in which the ecologicalscales were tipped in favour of preferred species. Those species includedplants that modern botanists separate out into competing classes of ‘weeds’,‘drugs’, ‘herbs’ and ‘food crops’, but which Neolithic botanists (schooledby hands-on experience, not textbooks) preferred to grow side by side.
Instead of ﬁxed ﬁelds, they exploited alluvial soils on the margins oflakes and springs, which shifted location from year to year. Instead ofhewing wood, tilling ﬁelds and carrying water, they found ways of‘persuading’ nature to do much of this labour for them. Theirs was not ascience of domination and classiﬁcation, but one of bending and coaxing,nurturing and cajoling, or even tricking the forces of nature, to increase thelikelihood of securing a favourable outcome.50 Their ‘laboratory’ was thereal world of plants and animals, whose innate tendencies they exploitedthrough close observation and experimentation. This Neolithic mode ofcultivation was, moreover, highly successful.
In lowland regions of the Fertile Crescent, such as the Jordan andEuphrates valleys, ecological systems of this kind fostered the incrementalgrowth of settlements and populations for three millennia. Pretending it wasall just some kind of very extended transition or rehearsal for the advent of‘serious’ agriculture is to miss the real point. It’s also to ignore what tomany has long seemed an obvious connection between Neolithic ecologyand the visibility of women in contemporary art and ritual. Whether onecalls these ﬁgures ‘goddesses’ or ‘scientists’ is perhaps less important than recognizing how their very appearance signals a new awareness of women’sstatus, which was surely based on their concrete achievements in bindingtogether these new forms of society.
Part of the difﬁculty with studying scientiﬁc innovation in prehistory isthat we have to imagine a world without laboratories; or rather, a world inwhich laboratories are potentially everywhere and anywhere. Here Lévi-Strauss is much more on the ball: 
… there are two distinct modes of scientiﬁc thought. These are
certainly not a function of different stages of development of the
human mind but rather of two strategic levels at which nature is
accessible to scientiﬁc enquiry: one roughly adapted to that of
perception and the imagination: the other at a remove from it. It is as
if the necessary connections which are the object of all science,
Neolithic or modern, could be arrived at by two different routes, one
very close to, and the other more remote from, sensible intuition.51 

Lévi-Strauss, as we noted, called the ﬁrst route to discovery a ‘science ofthe concrete’. And it’s important to recall that most of humanity’s greatestscientiﬁc discoveries – the invention of farming, pottery, weaving,metallurgy, systems of maritime navigation, monumental architecture, theclassiﬁcation and indeed domestication of plants and animals, and so on –were made under precisely those other (Neolithic) sorts of conditions.Judged by its results, then, this concrete approach was undeniably science.But what does ‘science of the concrete’ actually look like, in thearchaeological record? How can we hope to see it at work, when so manythousands of years stand between us and the processes of innovation we aretrying to understand? The answer here lies precisely in its ‘concreteness’.Invention in one domain ﬁnds echoes and analogies across a whole range ofothers, which might otherwise seem completely unrelated.
We can see this clearly in Early Neolithic cereal cultivation. Recall thatﬂood-retreat farming required people to establish durable settlements inmud-based environments, like swamps and lake margins. Doing so meantbecoming intimate with the properties of soils and clays, carefullyobserving their fertility under different conditions, but also experimentingwith them as tectonic materials, or even as vehicles of abstract thought. Aswell as supporting new forms of cultivation, soil and clay – mixed with wheat and chaff – became basic materials of construction: essential in building the ﬁrst permanent houses; used to make ovens, furniture andinsulation – almost everything, in fact, except pottery, a later invention inthis part of the world.
But clay was also used, in the same times and places, to (literally) modelrelationships of utterly different kinds, between men and women, peopleand animals. People started using its plastic qualities to ﬁgure out mentalproblems, making small geometric tokens that many see as direct precursorsto later systems of mathematical notation. Archaeologists ﬁnd these tinynumerical devices in direct association with ﬁgurines of herd animals andfull-bodied women: the kind of miniatures that stimulate so much modern speculation about Neolithic spirituality, and which ﬁnd later echoes inmyths about the demiurgic, life-giving properties of clay.52 As we’ll soon see, earth and clay even came to redeﬁne relationships between the livingand the dead. 
Seen this way, the ‘origins of farming’ start to look less like an economictransition and more like a media revolution, which was also a socialrevolution, encompassing everything from horticulture to architecture,mathematics to thermodynamics, and from religion to the remodelling ofgender roles. And while we can’t know exactly who was doing what in thisbrave new world, it’s abundantly clear that women’s work and knowledgewere central to its creation; that the whole process was a fairly leisurely,even playful one, not forced by any environmental catastrophe ordemographic tipping point and unmarked by major violent conﬂict. What’smore, it was all carried out in ways that made radical inequality anextremely unlikely outcome. 
All this applies most clearly to the development of Early Neolithic societiesin lowland parts of the Fertile Crescent, and especially along the valleys ofthe Jordan and Euphrates Rivers. But these communities did not develop inisolation. For almost the entire period we’ve been discussing, the uplandcrescent – following the foothills of the Taurus and Zagros Mountains andthe adjoining steppe – was also home to settled populations, adept inmanaging a variety of wild plant and animal resources. They too were oftenvillage dwellers, who adopted strategies of cultivation and herding as theysaw ﬁt, while still deriving the bulk of their diet from non-domesticatedspecies. But in other ways they are clearly marked out from their lowland neighbours, their construction of megalithic architecture, including thefamous structures of Göbekli Tepe, being just the most obvious. Some ofthese groups lived in proximity to lowland Neolithic societies, especiallyalong the upper reaches of the Euphrates, but their art and ritual suggest aradically different orientation to the world, as sharply distinguished fromthe latter as Northwest Coast foragers were from their Californianneighbours. 
TO FARM OR NOT TO FARM: IT’S ALL IN YOUR HEAD(WHERE WE RETURN TO GÖBEKLI TEPE) 
At the frontier between the upland and lowland sectors of the FertileCrescent stands Göbekli Tepe itself. It is actually one of a series ofmegalithic centres that sprang up around the Urfa valley, near the modernborder of Syria and Turkey, in the ninth millennium BC.53 Most are still not excavated. Only the tops of their great T-shaped pillars can be seenprojecting from the deep valley soils. While direct evidence is still lacking,this style of stone architecture probably marks the apex of a buildingtradition that began in timber. Wooden prototypes may also lie behindGöbekli Tepe’s tradition of sculptural art, which evokes a world of fearsomeimages, far removed from the visual arts of the lowlands, with their humbleﬁgurines of women and domestic animals, and hamlets of clay.
In both medium and message, Göbekli Tepe could hardly be moredifferent from the world of early farming communities. Its standing remainswere wrought from stone, a material little used for construction in theEuphrates and Jordan valleys. Carved on these stone pillars is an imagerydominated by wild and venomous animals; scavengers and predators,almost exclusively sexed male. On a limestone pillar a lion rears up in highrelief, teeth gnashing, claws outstretched, penis and scrotum on show.Elsewhere lurks a malevolent boar, its male sex also displayed. The mostoften repeated images depict raptors taking human heads. One remarkablesculpture, resembling a totem pole, comprises superimposed pairings ofvictims and predators: disembodied skulls and sharp-eyed birds of prey.Elsewhere, ﬂesh-eating birds and other carnivores are shown grasping,tossing about or otherwise playing with their catch of human crania; carvedbelow one such ﬁgure on a monumental pillar is the image of a headlessman with an erect penis (conceivably this depicts the kind of immediate 
post-mortem erection or ‘priapism’ that occurs in victims of hanging orbeheading as a result of massive trauma to the spinal cord).54 

What are these images telling us? Could the taking of trophy headsamong upland populations of the steppe-forest zone be part of the picture?At the settlement of Nevalı Çori – also in Urfa province, and with similarmonuments to Göbekli Tepe – burials with detached skulls were found,including one of a young woman with a ﬂint dagger still lodged under herjaw; while from Jerf el-Ahmar – on the Upper Euphrates, where thelowland crescent approaches the uplands – comes the startling ﬁnd of asplayed skeleton (again, a young woman) still lying inside a burnt-downbuilding, prone and missing her head.55 At Göbekli Tepe itself, thechopping of human heads was mimicked in statuary: anthropomorphicsculptures were made, only to have their tops smashed off and the stoneheads buried adjacent to pillars within the shrines.56 For all this,archaeologists remain rightly cautious about linking such practices toconﬂict or predation; so far, there is only limited evidence for interpersonalviolence, let alone warfare at this time.57 

Here we might also consider evidence from Çayönü Tepesi, in the Erganiplain. This was the site of a large prehistoric settlement comprisingsubstantial houses built on stone foundations, as well as public buildings. Itlay on a tributary of the Tigris in the hill country of Diyarbakır, not far northof Göbekli Tepe, and was established around the same time by a communityof hunter-foragers and sometime herders.58 Near the centre of the settlement stood a long-lived structure that archaeologists call the ‘House ofSkulls’, for the simple reason that it was found to hold the remains of over450 people, including headless corpses and over ninety crania, all crammedinto small compartments. Cervical vertebrae were attached to some skulls,indicating they were severed from ﬂeshed (but not necessarily living)bodies. Most of the heads were taken from young adults or adolescents,individuals in the prime of life, and ten from children. If any of these weretrophy skulls, claimed from victims or enemies, then they were chosen fortheir vitality. The skulls were left bare, with no trace of decoration.59 

Human remains in the House of Skulls were stored together with those oflarge prey animals, and a wild cattle skull was mounted on an outside wall.In its later stages of use, the building was furnished with a polished stonetable, erected near the entrance in an open plaza that could have hostedlarge gatherings. Studies of blood residues from the surface, and from associated objects, led researchers to identify this as an altar on whichpublic sacriﬁce and processing of bodies took place, the victims bothanimal and human. Whether or not the detail of this reconstruction is correct, the association of vanquished animals and human remains issuggestive. The House of Skulls met its end in a violent conﬂagration, afterwhich the people of Çayönü covered the whole complex under a deepblanket of pebbles and soil.
Perhaps what we’re detecting in the House of Skulls, but in a ratherdifferent form, is a complex of ideas already familiar from Amazonia andelsewhere: hunting as predation, shifting subtly from a mode of subsistenceto a way of modelling and enacting dominance over other human beings.After all, even feudal lords in Europe tended to identify themselves withlions, hawks and predatory beasts (they were also fond of the symbolism ofputting heads on poles; ‘off with his head!’ is still the most popular phraseidentiﬁed with the British monarchy).60 But what about Göbekli Tepeitself? If the display of trophy heads really was an important aspect of thesite’s function, surely some direct trace would remain, other than just somesuggestive stone carvings.
Human remains are so far rare at Göbekli Tepe. Which makes it evenmore remarkable that – of the few hundred scraps of prehistoric humanbone so far recovered from the site – some two-thirds are indeed segmentsof skulls or facial bones, some retaining signs of de-ﬂeshing, and evendecapitation. Among them were found remnants of three skulls, recoveredfrom the area of the stone shrines, which bear evidence for more elaboratetypes of cultural modiﬁcation in the form of deep incisions and drill-holes,allowing the skull to dangle from a string or be mounted on a pole.61 

In earlier chapters, we’ve explored why farming was much less of a rupturein human affairs than we tend to assume. Now we’re ﬁnally in a position tobring the various strands of this chapter together and say something aboutwhy this matters. Let’s recap.
Neolithic farming began in Southwest Asia as a series of localspecializations in crop-raising and animal-herding, scattered across variousparts of the region, with no epicentre. These local strategies were pursued, itseems, in order to sustain access to trade partnerships and optimal locationsfor hunting and gathering, which continued unabated alongside cultivation.As we discussed back in Chapter One, this ‘trade’ might well have had 
more to do with sociability, romance or adventure than material advantageas we’d normally conceive it. Still, whatever the reasons, over thousands ofyears such local innovations – everything from non-shattering wheat todocile sheep – were exchanged between villages, producing a degree ofuniformity among a coalition of societies across the Middle East. Astandard ‘package’ of mixed farming emerged, from the Iranian Zagros tothe eastern shores of the Mediterranean, and then spread beyond it, albeit,as we’ll see, with very mixed success.
But from its earliest beginnings, farming was much more than a neweconomy. It also saw the creation of patterns of life and ritual that remaindoggedly with us millennia later, and have since become ﬁxtures of socialexistence among a broad sector of humanity: everything from harvestfestivals to habits of sitting on benches, putting cheese on bread, enteringand exiting via doorways, or looking at the world through windows.Originally, as we’ve seen, much of this Neolithic lifestyle developedalongside an alternative cultural pattern in the steppe and upland zones ofthe Fertile Crescent, most clearly distinguished by the building of grandmonuments in stone, and by a symbolism of male virility and predation thatlargely excluded female concerns. By contrast, the art and ritual of lowlandsettlements in the Euphrates and Jordan valleys presents women as co-creators of a distinct form of society – learned through the productiveroutines of cultivation, herding and village life – and celebrated bymodelling and binding soft materials, such as clay or ﬁbres, into symbolicforms.62 

Of course, we could put these cultural oppositions down to coincidence,or perhaps even environmental factors. But considering the close proximityof the two cultural patterns, and how the groups responsible for themexchanged goods and were keenly aware of each other’s existence, it isequally possible, and perhaps more plausible, to see what happened as theresult of mutual and self-conscious differentiation, or schismogenesis, akinto what we traced in the last chapter among the recent foraging societies ofAmerica’s West Coast. The more that uplanders came to organize theirartistic and ceremonial lives around the theme of predatory male violence,the more lowlanders tended to organize theirs around female knowledgeand symbolism – and vice versa. With no written sources to guide us, theclearest evidence we can ﬁnd for such mutual oppositions is when thingsget (quite literally, in our case) turned on their head, as when one group of people seems to make a great display of going against some highlycharacteristic behaviour of their neighbours.
Such evidence is not at all hard to ﬁnd, since lowland villagers, like theirupland neighbours, also attached great ritual signiﬁcance to human heads,but chose to treat them in ways that would have been utterly foreign to theuplanders. Let us brieﬂy illustrate what we mean.
Perhaps the most recognizable – and deﬁnitely the most macabre –objects found in Early Neolithic villages of the Levantine Corridor (Israel,Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and the Syrian Euphrates) are ‘skull portraits’.These are heads that were removed from burials of women, men andoccasionally children in a secondary process, after the corpse haddecomposed. Once separated from the body, they were cleaned andcarefully modelled over with clay, then coated with layers of plaster tobecome something altogether different. Shells were often ﬁxed into the eyesockets, just as clay and plaster ﬁlled in for the ﬂesh and skin. Red andwhite paint added further life. Skull portraits appear to have been treasuredheirlooms, carefully stored and repaired over generations. They reachedtheir height of popularity in the eighth millennium BC, as Göbekli Tepe fellinto decline, when the practice spread as far as Çatalhöyük; there, one suchmodelled head was found in an intimate situation, clutched to the chest of afemale burial.63 

Ever since these intriguing objects ﬁrst came to light at Jericho in theearly twentieth century, archaeologists have puzzled over their meaning.Many scholars see them as expressions of care and reverence for ancestors.But there are literally countless ways one might show respect or grief forancestors without systematically removing crania from their places of restand modelling life into them by adding layers of clay, plaster, shell, ﬁbreand pigment. Even in the lowland parts of the Fertile Crescent, thistreatment was reserved for a minority of individuals. More often, humancrania removed from burials were left bare, while others had complexhistories as ritual objects, such as a group of skulls from Tell Qarassa insouthern Syria, found to have been deliberately mutilated around the face inwhat appears to have been an act of post-mortem desecration.64 

In the Jordan and Euphrates valleys and adjacent coastlands, the practiceof curating human crania has an even longer history, extending back toNatuﬁan hunter-gatherers, before the onset of the Neolithic period; butlongevity need not imply an entirely local context for later ritual innovations, such as the addition of decorative materials to make skullportraits. Perhaps making skull portraits in this particular way was not justabout reconnecting with the dead, but also negating the logic of stripping,cutting, piercing and accumulating heads as trophies. At the very least, itoffers a further indication that lowland and upland populations in the FertileCrescent were following quite different – and in some ways, mutuallyopposed – cultural trajectories throughout the centuries when plants andanimals were ﬁrst domesticated.65 

ON SEMANTIC SNARES AND METAPHYSICAL MIRAGES 
Back in the 1970s, a brilliant Cambridge archaeologist called David Clarkepredicted that, with modern research, almost every aspect of the old ediﬁceof human evolution, ‘the explanations of the development of modern man,domestication, metallurgy, urbanization and civilization – may inperspective emerge as semantic snares and metaphysical mirages.’66 It is beginning to seem like he was right.
Let’s recap a little further. A founding block in that old ediﬁce of humansocial evolution was the allocation of a speciﬁc place in history to foragingsocieties, which was to be the prelude to an ‘Agricultural Revolution’ thatsupposedly changed everything about the course of history. The job offoragers in this conventional narrative is to be all that farming is not (andthus also to explain, by implication, what farming is). If farmers aresedentary, foragers must be mobile; if farmers actively produce food,foragers must merely collect it; if farmers have private property, foragersmust renounce it; and if farming societies are unequal, this is by contrastwith the ‘innate’ egalitarianism of foragers. Finally, if a particular group offoragers should happen to possess any such features in common withfarmers, the dominant narrative demands that these can only be ‘incipient’,‘emergent’ or ‘deviant’ in nature, so that the destiny of foragers is either to‘evolve’ into farmers, or eventually to wither and die.
It will by now be increasingly obvious to any reader that almost nothingabout this established narrative matches the available evidence. In the Fertile Crescent of the Middle East, long regarded as the cradle of the‘Agricultural Revolution’, there was in fact no ‘switch’ from Palaeolithicforager to Neolithic farmer. The transition from living mainly on wildresources to a life based on food production took something in the order of 3,000 years. And while agriculture allowed for the possibility of more unequal concentrations of wealth, in most cases this only began to happenmillennia after its inception. In the centuries between, people wereeffectively trying farming on for size, ‘play farming’ if you will, switchingbetween modes of production, much as they switched their social structuresback and forth. 
Clearly, it no longer makes any sense to use phrases like ‘the AgriculturalRevolution’ when dealing with processes of such inordinate length andcomplexity. And since there was no Eden-like state from which the ﬁrstfarmers could take their ﬁrst steps on the road to inequality, it makes evenless sense to talk about agriculture as marking the origins of social rank,inequality or private property. In the Fertile Crescent, it is – if anything –among upland groups, furthest removed from a dependence on agriculture,that we ﬁnd stratiﬁcation and violence becoming entrenched; while theirlowland counterparts, who linked the production of crops to importantsocial rituals, come out looking decidedly more egalitarian; and much ofthis egalitarianism relates to an increase in the economic and socialvisibility of women, reﬂected in their art and ritual. In that sense, the workof Gimbutas – while painted with brush strokes that were broad, sometimesto the point of caricature – was not entirely wide of the mark.
All this raises an obvious question: if the adoption of farming actually sethumanity, or some small part of it, on a course away from violent domination, what went wrong? 

7 

The Ecology of Freedom 
How farming ﬁrst hopped, stumbled and bluffed its way around the world 
In a way, the Fertile Crescent of the Middle East is unusual preciselybecause we know so much about what happened there. Long recognized asa crucible of plant and animal domestication, it has been more intensivelystudied by archaeologists than almost any other region outside Europe. Thisaccumulation of evidence allows us to begin to tease out some of the socialchanges that accompanied the ﬁrst steps to crop and animal domestication,even to rely to a certain extent on negative evidence. It is difﬁcult, forinstance, to make any sort of convincing argument that warfare was asigniﬁcant feature of early farming societies in the Middle East, as by nowone would expect some evidence for it to have shown up in the record. Onthe other hand, there is abundant evidence for the proliferation of trade andspecialized crafts, and for the importance of female ﬁgures in art and ritual.
For the same reasons, we’re able to draw comparisons between thelowland part of the Fertile Crescent (especially the Levantine Corridorpassing via the Jordan valley) and its upland sector (the plains and foothillsof eastern Turkey), where equally precocious developments in village lifeand local industries were associated with the raising of stone monumentsadorned with masculine symbolism and an imagery of predatory violence.1 
Some scholars have tried to see all these developments as somehow part ofa single process, heading in the same general direction, towards the ‘birth ofagriculture’. But the ﬁrst farmers were reluctant farmers who seem to haveunderstood the logistical implications of agriculture and avoided any majorcommitment to it. Their upland neighbours, also living settled lives in areaswith diverse wild resources, had even less incentive to tie their existence toa narrow range of crops and livestock. 
If the situation in just one cradle of early farming was that complicated,then surely it no longer makes sense to ask, ‘what were the socialimplications of the transition to farming?’ – as if there was necessarily justone transition, and one set of implications. Certainly, it’s wrong to assumethat planting seeds or tending sheep means one is necessarily obliged toaccept more unequal social arrangements, simply to avert a ‘tragedy of thecommons’. There is a paradox here. Most general works on the course ofhuman history do actually assume something like this; but almost nobody, ifpressed, would seriously defend such a point because it’s an obvious strawman. Any student of agrarian societies knows that people inclined toexpand agriculture sustainably, without privatizing land or surrendering itsmanagement to a class of overseers, have always found ways to do so.
Communal tenure, ‘open-ﬁeld’ principles, periodic redistribution of plotsand co-operative management of pasture are not particularly exceptionaland were often practised for centuries in the same locations.2 The Russian mir is a famous example, but similar systems of land redistribution onceexisted all over Europe, from the Highlands of Scotland to the Balkans,occasionally into very recent times. The Anglo-Saxon term was run-rig or rundale. Of course, the rules of redistribution varied from one case to thenext – in some, it was made per stirpes, in others according to the numberof people in a family. Most often, the precise location of each strip wasdetermined by lottery, with each family receiving one strip per land tract ofdiffering quality, so that nobody was obliged to travel much further thananyone else to his ﬁelds or to work soil of consistently lower quality.3 

Of course, it wasn’t just in Europe that such things happened. In his 1875Lectures on the Early History of Institutions, Henry Sumner Maine – whoheld the ﬁrst chair of historical and comparative jurisprudence at Oxford –was already discussing cases of periodic land redistribution and rundale.type institutions from India to Ireland, noting that almost up until his ownday, ‘cases were frequent in which the arable land was divided into farmswhich shifted among the tenant-families periodically, and sometimesannually.’ And that in pre-industrial Germany, where land tenure wasapportioned between ‘mark associations’, each tenant would receive lotsdivided among the three main qualities of soil. Importantly, he notes, thesewere not so much forms of property as ‘modes of occupation’, not unlikethe rights of access found in many forager groups.4 We could go on piling 
up the examples (the Palestinian mash’a system, for instance, or Balinesesubak).5 

In short, there is simply no reason to assume that the adoption ofagriculture in more remote periods also meant the inception of private landownership, territoriality, or an irreversible departure from forageregalitarianism. It may have happened that way sometimes, but this can nolonger be treated as a default assumption. As we saw in the last chapter,exactly the opposite seems true in the Fertile Crescent of the Middle East, atleast for the ﬁrst few thousand years after the appearance of farming. If thesituation in just one cradle of early farming was so different from ourevolutionary expectations, then we can only wonder what other storiesremain to be told, in other places where farming emerged. Indeed, theseother locations are multiplying in light of new evidence, genetic andbotanical, as well as archaeological. It turns out the process was far messier,and far less unidirectional, than anyone had guessed; and so we have toconsider a broader range of possibilities than once assumed. In this chapter,we’ll show just how much the picture is changing and point towards someof the surprising new patterns that are starting to emerge. 
Geographers and historians used to believe that plants and animals wereﬁrst domesticated in just a few ‘nuclear’ zones: the same areas in whichlarge-scale, politically centralized societies later appeared. In the MiddleEast there was wheat and barley, as well as sheep, goats, pigs and cattle; inChina there was rice (japonica), soybeans and a different variety of pig;potatoes, quinoa and llamas were brought under domestication in thePeruvian Andes; and maize, avocado and chilli in Mesoamerica. Such neatgeographical alignments between early centres of crop domestication andthe rise of centralized states invited speculation that the former led to thelatter: that food production was responsible for the emergence of cities,writing, and centralized political organization, providing a surplus ofcalories to support large populations and elite classes of administrators,warriors and politicians. Invent agriculture – or so the story once went –and you set yourself on a course that will eventually lead to Assyriancharioteers, Confucian bureaucrats, Inca sun-kings or Aztec priests carryingaway a signiﬁcant chunk of your grain. Domination – and most oftenviolent, ugly domination – was sure to follow; it was just a matter of time. 
Archaeological science has changed all this. Experts now identifybetween ﬁfteen and twenty independent centres of domestication, many ofwhich followed very different paths of development to China, Peru,Mesoamerica or Mesopotamia (which themselves all followed quitedifferent paths, as we’ll see in later chapters). To those centres of earlyfarming must now be added, among others, the Indian subcontinent (wherebrowntop millet, mungbeans, horse gram, indica rice and humped zebucattle were domesticated); the grasslands of West Africa (pearl millet); thecentral highlands of New Guinea (bananas, taroes and yams); the tropicalforests of South America (manioc and peanuts); and the Eastern Woodlandsof North America, where a distinct suite of local seed crops – goosefoot,sunﬂower and sumpweed – was raised, long before the introduction ofmaize from Mesoamerica.6 

We know much less about the prehistory of these other regions than wedo about the Fertile Crescent. None followed a linear trajectory from foodproduction to state formation. Nor is there any reason to assume a rapidspread of farming beyond them to neighbouring areas. Food production didnot always present itself to foragers, ﬁshers and hunters as an obviouslybeneﬁcial thing. Historians painting with a broad brush sometimes write asif it did, or as if the only barriers to the ‘spread of farming’ were naturalones, such as climate and topography. This sets up something of a paradox,because even foragers living in highly suitable environments, and clearlyaware of the possibilities of cereal-farming, often chose not to adopt it. TakeJared Diamond: 
Just as some regions proved much more suitable than others fororigins of food production, the ease of its spread also varied greatlyaround the world. Some areas that are ecologically very suitable forfood production never acquired it in prehistoric times at all, eventhough areas of prehistoric food production existed nearby. Themost conspicuous such examples are the failure of both farming andherding to reach Native American California from the U.S.Southwest or to reach Australia from New Guinea and Indonesia,and the failure of farming to spread from South Africa’s NatalProvince to South Africa’s Cape.7 



As we saw in Chapter Five, the failure of farming to ‘reach’ California isnot a particularly compelling way to frame the problem. This is just anupdated version of the old diffusionist approach, which identiﬁes culturetraits (cat’s cradles, musical instruments, agriculture and so on) and mapsout how they migrate across the globe, and why in some places they fail todo so. In reality, there’s every reason to believe that farming ‘reached’California just as soon as it reached anywhere else in North America. It’sjust that (despite a work ethic that valorized strenuous labour, and a regionalexchange system that would have allowed information about innovations tospread rapidly) people there rejected the practice as deﬁnitively as they didslavery.
Even in the American Southwest, the overall trend for 500 years or sobefore Europeans arrived was the gradual abandonment of maize and beans,which people had been growing in some cases for thousands of years, and areturn to a foraging way of life. If anything, during this period Californianswere the ones doing the spreading, with populations originally from the eastof the state bringing new foraging techniques, and replacing previouslyagricultural peoples, as far away as Utah and Wyoming. By the timeSpaniards arrived in the Southwest, the Pueblo societies which had oncedominated the region were reduced to isolated pockets of farmers, entirelysurrounded by hunter-gatherers.8 

ON SOME ISSUES OF TERMINOLOGY WHEN DISCUSSING THE MOVEMENT OF DOMESTIC CROPS AND ANIMALS AROUND THE GLOBE 
In books on world history, you often encounter phrases like ‘crops andlivestock spread rapidly through Eurasia’, or ‘the plant package of theFertile Crescent launched food production from Ireland to the Indus’, or‘maize diffused northwards at a snail’s pace.’ How appropriate is suchlanguage when describing the expansion of Neolithic economies manythousands of years ago? 
If anything, it seems to reﬂect the experience of the last few centuries,when Old World domesticates did indeed conquer the environments of theAmericas and Oceania. In those more recent times, crops and livestockwere able to ‘spread’ like wildﬁre, transforming existing habitats in waysthat often rendered them unrecognizable within a few generations. But thishas less to do with the nature of seed cultivation itself than with imperialand commercial expansion: seeds can spread very quickly if those carryingthem have an army and are driven by the need endlessly to expand theirenterprises to maintain proﬁts. The Neolithic situation was altogetherdifferent. Especially for the ﬁrst several thousand years after the end of thelast Ice Age, most people were still not farmers, and farmers’ crops had tocompete with a whole panoply of wild predators and parasites, most ofwhich have since been eliminated from agricultural landscapes.
To begin with, domestic plants and animals could not ‘spread’ beyondtheir original ecological limits without signiﬁcant effort on the part of theirhuman planters and keepers. Suitable environments not only had to befound but also modiﬁed by weeding, manuring, terracing, and so on. Thelandscape modiﬁcations involved may seem small-scale – little more thanecological tinkering – to our eyes, but they were onerous enough by localstandards, and crucial in extending the range of domestic species.9 Of course, there were always paths of least resistance, topographical featuresand climatic regimes conducive or less conducive to the Neolithic economy.The east–west axis of Eurasia discussed by Jared Diamond in his Guns,Germs and Steel (1997) or the ‘lucky latitudes’ of Ian Morris’s Why theWest Rules – For Now (2010) are ecological corridors of this sort.
Eurasia, as these authors point out, has few equivalents to the sharpclimatic variations of the Americas, or indeed of Africa. Terrestrial speciescan travel across the breadth of the Eurasian continent without crossingboundaries between tropical and temperate zones. Continents whoseextremities tilt north to south are a different proposition, and perhaps lessamenable to such ecological transfers. The basic geographical point issurely sound, at least for the last 10,000 years of history. It explains whycereals of Fertile Crescent origin are successfully grown today in suchdistant locations as Ireland and Japan. It may also explain, to some extent,why many thousands of years elapsed before American crops – such asmaize or squash (ﬁrst domesticated in the tropics) – were accepted in the temperate northern part of the American continent, by contrast with therelatively rapid adoption of Eurasian crops outside their areas of origin.
To what extent can such observations help to make sense of humanhistory on a larger scale? How far can geography go in explaining history,rather than simply informing it? 
Back in the 1970s and 1980s, a geographer called Alfred W. Crosby cameup with a number of important theories about how ecology shaped thecourse of history. Among other things, he was the ﬁrst to draw attention tothe ‘Columbian exchange’, the remarkable crossover of non-human speciesset in motion by Europeans’ arrival in the Americas after 1492, and itstransformative effect on the global conﬁguration of culture, economy andcuisine. Tobacco, peppers, potatoes and turkeys ﬂowed into Eurasia; maize,rubber and chickens entered Africa; and citrus fruits, coffee, horses,donkeys and livestock travelled to the Americas. Crosby went on to arguethat the global ascendance of European economies since the sixteenthcentury could be accounted for by a process he called ‘ecologicalimperialism’.10 

The temperate zones of North America and Oceania, as Crosby pointedout, were ideally suited to Eurasian crops and livestock; not only because oftheir climate, but because they possessed few native competitors and nolocal parasites, such as the various funguses, insects or ﬁeld mice that havedeveloped to specialize in sharing human-grown wheat. Unleashed on suchfresh environments, Old World domesticates went into reproductiveoverdrive, even going feral again in some cases. Outgrowing and out-grazing local ﬂora and fauna, they began to turn native ecosystems on theirheads, creating ‘Neo-Europes’ – carbon copies of European environments,of the sort one sees today when driving through the countryside of NewZealand’s North Island, for example; or much of New England. Theecological assault on native habitats also included infectious diseases, suchas smallpox and measles, which originated in Old World environmentswhere humans and cattle cohabited. While European plants thrived in theabsence of pests, diseases brought with domestic animals (or by humansaccustomed to living alongside them) wreaked havoc on indigenouspopulations, creating casualty rates as high as 95 per cent, even in placeswhere settlers were not enslaving or actively massacring the indigenouspopulation – which, of course, they often were. 
Viewed in this light, the success of modern European imperialism owedmore to ‘the Old World Neolithic Revolution’ – with its roots in the Fertile Crescent – than to the speciﬁc achievements of Columbus, Magellan, Cookand all the rest. And in a sense this is true. But the story of agriculturalexpansion before the sixteenth century is very far from being a one-waystreet; in fact, it is full of false starts, hiccups and reversals. This becomestruer the further back we go in time. To appreciate why, we will have tolook beyond the Middle East to consider how the earliest farmingpopulations fared in some other parts of the world after the end of the lastIce Age. But ﬁrst there is a more basic point to address: why is ourdiscussion of these issues conﬁned only to the last 10,000 or so years ofhuman history? Given that humans have been around for upwards of200,000 years, why didn’t farming develop much earlier? 
WHY AGRICULTURE DID NOT DEVELOP SOONER 
Since our species came into existence, there have been only two sustainedperiods of warm climate of the kind that might support an agriculturaleconomy for long enough to leave some trace in the archaeologicalrecord.11 The ﬁrst was the Eemian interglacial, which took place around130,000 years ago. Global temperatures stabilized at slightly above theirpresent-day levels, sustaining the spread of boreal forests as far north asAlaska and Finland. Hippos basked on the banks of the Thames and theRhine. But the impact on human populations was limited by our thenrestricted geographical range. The second is the one we are living in now.When it began, around 12,000 years ago, people were already present on allthe world’s continents, and in many different kinds of environment.Geologists call this period the Holocene, from Greek holos (entire), kainos (new).
Many earth scientists now consider the Holocene over and done. For atleast the last two centuries we have been entering a new geological epoch,the Anthropocene, in which for the ﬁrst time in history human activities arethe main drivers of global climate change. Where exactly the Anthropocenebegins is a scientiﬁc bone of contention. Most experts point to the IndustrialRevolution, but some put its origins earlier, in the late 1500s and early1600s. At that time, a global drop in surface air temperatures occurred –part of the ‘Little Ice Age’ – which natural forces can’t explain. Quite likely, European expansion in the Americas played a role. With perhaps 90per cent of the indigenous population eliminated by the effects of conquestand infectious disease, forests reclaimed regions in which terracedagriculture and irrigation had been practised for centuries. In Mesoamerica,Amazonia and the Andes, some 50 million hectares of cultivated land mayhave reverted to wilderness. Carbon uptake from vegetation increased on ascale sufﬁcient to change the Earth System and bring about a human-drivenphase of global cooling.12 

Wherever one starts it, the Anthropocene is what we have done with thelegacy of a Holocene Age, which in some ways had been a ‘clean sheet’ forhumanity. At its onset, many things really were new. As the ice receded,ﬂora and fauna – once conﬁned to small refuge zones – spread out to newvistas. People followed, helping favoured species on their way by settingﬁres and clearing land. The effect of global warming on the world’sshorelines was more complex, as coastal shelves formerly under ice sprangback to the surface, while others sank below rising seawaters, fed fromglacial melt.13 For many historians, the onset of the Holocene is signiﬁcantbecause it created conditions for the origins of agriculture. Yet in manyparts of the world, as we’ve already seen, it was also a Golden Age forforagers, and it’s important to remember that this forager paradise was thecontext in which the ﬁrst farmers set up shop.
The most vigorous expansion of foraging populations was in coastalenvironments, freshly exposed by glacial retreat. Such locations offered abonanza of wild resources. Saltwater ﬁsh and sea birds, whales anddolphins, seals and otters, crabs, shrimps, oysters, periwinkles and morebesides. Freshwater rivers and lagoons, fed by mountain glaciers, nowteemed with pike and bream, attracting migratory waterfowl. Aroundestuaries, deltas and lake margins, annual rounds of ﬁshing and foragingtook place at increasingly close range, leading to sustained patterns ofhuman aggregation quite unlike those of the glacial period, when longseasonal migrations of mammoth and other large game structured much ofsocial life.14 

Scrub and forest replaced open steppe and tundra across much of thispostglacial world. As in earlier times, foragers used various techniques ofland management to stimulate the growth of desired species, such as fruitand nut-bearing trees. By 8000 BC, their efforts had contributed to theextinction of roughly two-thirds of the world’s megafauna, which were ill 
suited to the warmer and more enclosed habitats of the Holocene.15 

Expanding woodlands offered a superabundance of nutritious and storablefoods: wild nuts, berries, fruits, leaves and fungi, processed with a newsuite of composite (‘micro-lithic’) tools. Where forest took over fromsteppe, human hunting techniques shifted from the seasonal co-ordinationof mass kills to more opportunistic and versatile strategies, focused onsmaller mammals with more limited home ranges, among them elk, deer,boar and wild cattle.16 

What is easy to forget, with hindsight, is that farmers entered into thiswhole new world very much as the cultural underdogs. Their earliestexpansions were about as far removed as one could imagine from themissions civilisatrices of modern agrarian empires. Mostly, as we’ll see,they ﬁlled in the territorial gaps left behind by foragers: geographical spaceseither too remote, inaccessible or simply undesirable to attract the sustainedattention of hunters, ﬁshers and gatherers. Even in such locations, theseoutlier economies of the Holocene would have decidedly mixed fortunes.Nowhere is this more dramatically illustrated than in the Early Neolithicperiod of central Europe, where farming endured one of its ﬁrst and mostconspicuous failures. To better understand the reasons why this failureoccurred, we will then consider some more successful expansions of earlyfarming populations in Africa, Oceania and the tropical lowlands of SouthAmerica. 
Historically speaking, there is no direct connection among these cases;but what they show, collectively, is how the fate of early farming societiesoften hinged less on ‘ecological imperialism’ than on what we might call –to adapt a phrase from the pioneer of social ecology, Murray Bookchin – an‘ecology of freedom’.17 By this we mean something quite speciﬁc. Ifpeasants are people ‘existentially involved in cultivation’,18 then the ecology of freedom (‘play farming’, in short) is precisely the oppositecondition. The ecology of freedom describes the proclivity of humansocieties to move (freely) in and out of farming; to farm without fullybecoming farmers; raise crops and animals without surrendering too muchof one’s existence to the logistical rigours of agriculture; and retain a foodweb sufﬁciently broad as to prevent cultivation from becoming a matter oflife and death. It is just this sort of ecological ﬂexibility that tends to beexcluded from conventional narratives of world history, which present theplanting of a single seed as a point of no return. 
Moving freely in and out of farming in this way, or hovering on itsthreshold, turns out to be something our species has done successfully for alarge part of its past.19 Such ﬂuid ecological arrangements – combininggarden cultivation, ﬂood-retreat farming on the margins of lakes or springs,small-scale landscape management (e.g. by burning, pruning and terracing)and the corralling or keeping of animals in semi-wild states, combined witha spectrum of hunting, ﬁshing and collecting activities – were once typicalof human societies in many parts of the world. Often these activities weresustained for thousands of years, and not infrequently supported largepopulations. As we’ll see, they may also have been crucial to the survival ofthose ﬁrst human populations to incorporate domesticated plants andanimals. Biodiversity – not bio-power – was the initial key to the growth ofNeolithic food production. 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER A NEOLITHIC CAUTIONARY TALE: THE GRISLY AND SURPRISING FATE OF CENTRAL EUROPE’S FIRST FARMERS 
Kilianstädten, Talheim, Schletz and Herxheim are all names of EarlyNeolithic sites on the loess plains of Austria and Germany. Collectively,they tell a very unfamiliar story of early agriculture.
In these places, starting around 5500 BC, villages of a similar culturaloutlook – known as the ‘Linear Pottery’ tradition – were established. Theyare among the villages of central Europe’s ﬁrst farmers. But, unlike mostother early farming settlements, each ended its life in a period of turmoil,marked by the digging and ﬁlling of mass graves. The contents of thesegraves attest to the annihilation, or attempted annihilation, of an entirecommunity: crudely dug trenches or reused ditches containing chaoticjumbles of human remains, including adults and children of both sexes,disposed of like so much refuse. Their bones show the telltale marks oftorture, mutilation and violent death – the breaking of limbs, taking ofscalps, butchering for cannibalism. At Kilianstädten and Asparn, youngerwomen were missing from the assemblage, suggesting their appropriationas captives.20 

The Neolithic farming economy had arrived in central Europe, carried bymigrants from the southeast, and with ultimately catastrophic consequencesfor some of those whose ancestors brought it there.21 The earliest settlements of these newcomers to the central European plains suggest arelatively free society, with few indicators of status difference either withinor between communities. Their basic family units – timber longhouses –were all approximately the same size; but around 5000 BC, disparities beganto appear between them, as also in the kind of goods placed with their dead.People enclosed their settlements within large ditches, which yield evidenceof warfare in the forms of arrows, axe heads and human remains. In somecases, when the sites were overrun, these ditches were turned into massgraves for the residents they had failed to defend.22 

Such is the quality and quantity of accurately dated material thatresearchers are able to model demographic trends accompanying thesechanges. Their reconstructions have come as something of a surprise. Thearrival of farming in central Europe was associated with an initial and quitemassive upsurge in population – which is of course exactly what one wouldexpect. But what followed was not the anticipated ‘up and up’ pattern ofdemographic growth. Instead came a disastrous downturn, a boom and bust,between 5000 and 4500 BC, and something approaching a regionalcollapse.23 These Early Neolithic groups arrived, they settled, and then inmany (but, we should emphasize, not all) areas their numbers dwindled intoobscurity, while in others they were bolstered through intermarriage withmore established forager populations. Only after a hiatus of roughly 1,000years did extensive cereal-farming take off again in central and northernEurope.24 

Older narratives of prehistory tended simply to assume that Neolithiccolonists held the upper hand over native foraging populations,demographically and socially; that they either replaced them, or convertedthem to a superior way of life through trade and intermarriage. The boom.and-bust pattern of early farming now documented in temperate Europecontradicts this picture and raises wider questions about the viability ofNeolithic economies in a world of foragers. To address these questions, weneed to know a bit more about the foraging populations themselves, andhow they developed their Pleistocene traditions after the Ice Age and intothe Holocene. 
Much of what we know about postglacial (Mesolithic) forager populationsin Europe derives from ﬁndings along the Baltic and Atlantic coasts. Muchmore is lost to the sea. We learn a great deal about these Holocene hunter.foragers from their funerary customs. From northern Russia throughScandinavia, and down to the Breton coast, they are illuminated by ﬁnds ofprehistoric cemeteries. Quite often, the burials were richly adorned. In theBaltic and Iberian regions they include copious amounts of amber. Corpseslie in striking postures – sitting or leaning, even ﬂipped on their heads –suggesting complex and now largely unfathomable codes of hierarchy. Onthe fringes of northern Eurasia, peat bogs and waterlogged sites preserveglimpses of a wood-carving tradition that produced decorated ski runners,sledges, canoes and monuments resembling the totem poles of the PaciﬁcNorthwest Coast.25 Staffs topped with elk and reindeer efﬁgies,reminiscent of Pleistocene rock art depictions, appear over broad areas: astable symbolism of authority, crossing the boundaries of local foraging groups.26 

How did Europe’s deep interior, where incoming farmers settled, lookfrom the vantage point of these established Mesolithic populations? Mostprobably like an ecological dead end, lacking the obvious advantages ofcoastal environments. It may have been precisely this that allowed LinearPottery colonists to spread freely west and north on the loess plains to beginwith: they were moving into areas with little or no prior occupation.Whether that reﬂects a conscious policy of avoiding local foragers isunclear. What’s clearer is that this wave of advance began to break as thenew farming groups approached more densely populated coastlands. Whatexactly this might have meant in practice is often ambiguous. For example,human remains of coastal foragers, found on Mesolithic sites in Brittany,show anomalous levels of terrestrial protein in the diet of many youngfemales, contrasting with the general prevalence of marine foods among therest of the population. It seems that women of inland origin (who until thenhad been eating largely meat, not ﬁsh) were joining coastal groups.27 

What does this tell us? It may indicate that women had been captured andtransported in raids, conceivably including raids by foragers on farmingcommunities.28 This can only be speculative; we cannot know for sure thatwomen moved involuntarily, or even that they moved at the behest of men.And while raiding and warfare were clearly part of the picture, it would besimplistic to attribute the initial failure of Neolithic farming in Europe tosuch factors alone. We’ll consider some broader explanations in due course.First, though, we should take a reprieve from Europe and examine some of the success stories of early farming. We will start with Africa, then move onto Oceania, and lastly the rather different but instructive case of Amazonia. 
SOME VERY DIFFERENT PLACES WHERE NEOLITHIC FARMING FOUND ITS FEET: THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE NILE VALLEY (c. 5000–4000 BC) AND THE COLONIZATION OFISLAND OCEANIA (c. 1600–500 BC) 
Around the time that Linear Pottery settlements were established in centralEurope, the Neolithic farming economy made its ﬁrst appearance in Africa.The African variant had the same ultimate origin, in Southwest Asia. Itcomprised the same basic suite of crops (emmer wheat and einkorn) andanimals (domestic sheep, goats and cattle – with perhaps some admixture oflocal African aurochs). Yet the African reception of this Neolithic ‘package’could not have been more different. It is almost as if the ﬁrst African farmers opened up the package, threw out some of the contents, thenrewrapped it in such strikingly distinct ways that one could easily mistake itfor a completely local invention. As, in many ways, it was.
The place where much of this happened was a region largely ignored byforagers until then, but soon to become a major axis of demographic andpolitical change: the Nile valley of Egypt and Sudan. By 3000 BC, thepolitical integration of its lower reaches with the Nile delta would producethe ﬁrst territorial kingdom of ancient Egypt, facing the Mediterranean.However, the cultural roots of this and all later Nilotic civilizations lay inmuch earlier transformations, linked to the adoption of farming between5000 and 4000 BC, with their centre of gravity more ﬁrmly in Africa. Theseﬁrst African farmers reinvented the Neolithic in their own image. Cerealcultivation was relegated to a minor pursuit (regaining its status onlycenturies later), and the idea that one’s social identity was represented byhearth and home was largely thrown out too. In their place came a quitedifferent Neolithic: supple, vibrant and travelling on the hoof.29 

This new form of Neolithic economy relied heavily on livestock-herding,combined with annual rounds of ﬁshing, hunting and foraging on the richﬂoodplain of the Nile, and in the oases and seasonal streams (wadis) ofwhat are now the neighbouring deserts, which were then still watered byannual rains. Herders moved periodically in and out of this ‘Green Sahara’,both west and east to the Red Sea coast. Complex systems of bodily display developed. New forms of personal adornment employed cosmetic pigmentsand minerals, prospected from the adjacent deserts, and a dazzling array ofbeadwork, combs, bangles and other ornaments made of ivory and bone, allrichly attested in Neolithic cemeteries running the length of the Nile valley,from Central Sudan to Middle Egypt.30 

What survives today of this amazing gear now graces the shelves ofmuseum displays the world over, reminding us that – before there werepharaohs – almost anyone could hope to be buried like a king, queen, princeor princess. 
Another of the world’s great Neolithic expansions took place in islandOceania. Its origins lay at the other end of Asia, in the rice- and millet-growing cultures of Taiwan and the Philippines (the deeper roots are inChina). Around 1600 BC a striking dispersal of farming groups took place,starting here and ending over 5,000 miles to the east in Polynesia.
Known as the ‘Lapita horizon’ (after the site in New Caledonia where itsdecorated pottery was ﬁrst identiﬁed), this precocious expansion – whichcalled into being the world’s ﬁrst deep-ocean outrigger canoes – is oftenconnected to the spread of Austronesian languages. Rice and millet, poorlysuited to tropical climates, were jettisoned in its early stages of dispersal.But as the Lapita horizon advanced, their place was taken by a richadmixture of tubers and fruit crops encountered along the way, togetherwith a growing menagerie of animal domesticates (pigs, joined by dogs andchickens; rats too hitched along for the ride). These species travelled withLapita colonists to previously uninhabited islands – among them Fiji, Tongaand Samoa – where they put down roots (quite literally, in the case of taroand other tubers).31 

Like the Linear Pottery farmers of central Europe, Lapita groups seem tohave avoided established centres of population. They gave a wide berth tothe forager stronghold of Australia, and skirted largely clear of Papua NewGuinea, where a local form of farming was already well established in theuplands around the Wahgi valley.32 On virgin islands and beside vacantlagoons they founded their villages, comprising houses perched on stilts.With stone adzes, a mainstay of their travelling toolkit, they cleared patchesof forest to make gardens for their crops – taroes, yams and bananas –which they supplemented with animal domesticates and a rich diet of ﬁsh,shellﬁsh and marine turtles, wild birds and fruit bats.33 

Unlike Europe’s ﬁrst farmers, the carriers of the Lapita horizondiversiﬁed their economy continuously as they spread. And this was not justtrue of their crops and animals. Voyaging eastwards, Lapita peoples left atrail of distinctive pottery, their most consistent signal in the archaeologicalrecord. Along the way they also encountered many new materials. The mostvalued, such as particular types of shell, were crafted into multi-mediaornaments – arm rings, necklaces, pendants – which left a trace onMelanesian and Polynesian island culture that was still visible manycenturies later, when Captain Cook (unwittingly retracing the steps ofLapita) caught sight of New Caledonia in 1774 and wrote that it remindedhim of Scotland. 
Lapita prestige items also included bird-feather headdresses (depicted onthe pottery), ﬁne pandanus leaf mats and obsidian. Obsidian blades,circulating thousands of miles away from their sources in the BismarckArchipelago, were used in tattooing and scariﬁcation to apply pigment andplant matter to the skin. While the tattoos themselves do not survive, theimpressed decoration of Lapita pots gives some hint of their underlyingschema, transferred from skin to ceramic. More recent traditions ofPolynesian tattooing and body art – ‘wrapping the body in images’, as afamous anthropological study puts it – remind us how little we really knowof the vibrant conceptual worlds of earlier times, and those who ﬁrst carriedsuch practices across remote Paciﬁc island-scapes.34 

ON THE CASE OF AMAZONIA, AND THE POSSIBILITIES OF‘PLAY FARMING’ 
On ﬁrst inspection, these three variations on ‘the Neolithic’ – European,African, Oceanic – might seem to have almost nothing in common.However, all share two important features. First, each involved a seriouscommitment to farming. Of the three, the Linear Pottery culture of Europeenmeshed itself most deeply in the raising of cereals and livestock. The Nilevalley was fully wedded to its herds, as was the Lapita to its pigs and yams.In every case, the species in question was fully domesticated, reliant onhuman intervention for its survival, and was no longer able to reproduceunassisted in the wild. For their part, the people in question had orientedtheir lives around the needs of certain plants and animals; enclosing,protecting and breeding those species was a perennial feature of their existence and a cornerstone of their diets. All of them had become ‘serious’ farmers. 
Second, all three cases involved a targeted spread of farming to landslargely uninhabited by existing populations. The highly mobile Neolithic ofthe Nile valley extended seasonally into the adjacent steppe-desert, butavoided regions that were already densely settled, such as the Nile delta, theSudanese gezira and the major oases (including the Fayum, where lakesideﬁsher-foragers prevailed, adopting and abandoning farming practiceslargely as it suited them).35 Similarly, the Linear Pottery culture of Europetook root in niches left open by Mesolithic foragers, such as patches ofloess soil and unused river levees. The Lapita horizon, too, was a relativelyclosed system, interacting with others when necessary, but otherwiseenfolding new resources into its own pattern of life. Serious farmers tendedto form societies with hard boundaries, ethnic and, in some cases, alsolinguistic.36 

But not all early farming expansions were of this ‘serious’ variety. In thelowland tropics of South America, archaeological research has uncovered adistinctly more playful tradition of Holocene food production. Similarpractices were still widely in evidence in Amazonia until recently, such aswe found among the Nambikwara of Brazil’s Mato Grosso region. Well intothe twentieth century, they spent the rainy season in riverside villages,clearing gardens and orchards to grow a panoply of crops including sweetand bitter manioc, maize, tobacco, beans, cotton, groundnuts, gourds andmore besides. Cultivation was a relaxed affair, with little effort spent onkeeping different species apart. And as the dry season commenced, thesetangled house gardens were abandoned altogether. The entire groupdispersed into small nomadic bands to hunt and forage, only to begin thewhole process again the following year, often in a different location.
In Greater Amazonia, such seasonal moves in and out of farming aredocumented among a wide range of indigenous societies and are ofconsiderable antiquity.37 So is the habit of keeping pets. It is often statedthat Amazonia has no indigenous animal domesticates, and from abiological standpoint this is true. From a cultural perspective, things lookmore complicated. Many rainforest groups carry with them what can onlybe described as a small zoo comprising tamed forest creatures: monkeys,parrots, collared peccaries, and so on. These pets are often the orphanedoffspring of animals hunted and killed for food. Taken in by human foster.parents, fed and nurtured through infancy, they become utterly dependenton their masters. This subservience lasts into maturity. Pets are not eaten.Nor are their keepers interested in breeding them. They live as individualmembers of the community, who treat them much like children, as subjectsof affection and sources of amusement.38 

Amazonian societies blur our conventional distinction between ‘wild’ and ‘domestic’ in other ways. Animals they routinely hunt and capture forfood include peccary, agouti and others we would classify as ‘wild’. Yetthese same species are locally considered as already domesticated, at leastin the sense of being subjects of supernatural ‘masters of the animals’ whoprotect them and to whom they are bound. ‘Master’ or ‘Mistress of theAnimals’ ﬁgures are actually very common in hunting societies; sometimesthey take the form of a huge or perfect specimen of a certain type of beast, akind of embodiment of the species, but at the same time they appear ashuman or humanlike owners of the species, to whom the souls of all deer, orseals, or caribou must be returned after hunters take them. In Amazonia,what this means in practice is that people avoid intervening in thereproduction of those particular species lest they usurp the role of spirits.
In other words, there was no obvious cultural route, in Amazonia, thatmight lead humans to become both the primary carers for and consumers ofother species; relationships were either too remote (in the case of game) ortoo intimate (in the case of pets). We are dealing here with people whopossess all the requisite ecological skills to raise crops and livestock, butwho nevertheless pull back from the threshold, maintaining a carefulbalancing act between forager (or better, perhaps, forester) and farmer.39 

Amazonia shows how this ‘in-and-out-of-farming’ game could be far morethan a transient affair. It seems to have played out over thousands of years,since during that time there is evidence of plant domestication and landmanagement, but little commitment to agriculture.40 From 500 BC, thisneotropical mode of food production expanded from its heartlands on theOrinoco and Rio Negro, tracking river systems through the rainforest, andultimately becoming established all the way from Bolivia to the Antilles. Itslegacy is clearest in the distribution of living and historical groups speakinglanguages of the Arawak family.41 

Arawak-speaking groups were famed in recent centuries as masterblenders of culture – traders and diplomats, forging diverse alliances, often for commercial advantage. Over 2,000 years ago, a similar process ofstrategic cultural mixing (quite unlike the avoidance strategies of more‘serious’ farmers) seems to have brought about the convergence of theAmazon basin into a regional system. Arawak languages and theirderivatives are spoken all along the várzea (alluvial terraces), from themouths of the Orinoco and Amazon to their Peruvian headwaters. But their users have little in the way of shared genetic ancestry. The various dialectsare structurally closer to those of their non-Arawak neighbours than to eachother, or to any putative Ur-language.
The impression is not at all of a uniform spread, but a targetedinterweaving of groups along the main routes of canoe-borne transport andtrade. The result was an interlaced network of cultural exchange, lackingclear boundaries or a centre. The latticework schema on Amazonian pottery,cotton fabrics and skin painting – recurring in strikingly similar styles fromone edge of the rainforest to the other – seem to model these connectiveprinciples, entangling human bodies in a complex cartography ofrelations.42 

Until quite recently, Amazonia was regarded as a timeless refuge of solitarytribes, about as close to Rousseau or Hobbes’s State of Nature as one couldpossibly get. As we’ve seen, such romantic notions persisted inanthropology well into the 1980s, through studies that cast groups like theYanomami in the role of ‘contemporary ancestors’, windows on to ourevolutionary past. Research in the ﬁelds of archaeology and ethnohistory isnow overturning this picture.
We now know that, by the beginning of the Christian era, the Amazonianlandscape was already studded with towns, terraces, monuments androadways, reaching all the way from the highland kingdoms of Peru to theCaribbean. The ﬁrst Europeans to arrive there in the sixteenth centurydescribed lively ﬂoodplain settlements governed by paramount chiefs whodominated their neighbours. It is tempting to dismiss these accounts asadventurers’ hyperbole, designed to impress the sponsors at home – but, asarchaeological science brings the outlines of this rainforest civilization intoview, it is increasingly difﬁcult to do so. Partly this new understanding isthe result of controlled research; partly a consequence of industrialdeforestation, which in the Upper Amazon basin (looking west to the 
Andes) has exposed from the canopy a tradition of monumental earthworks,executed to precise geometrical plans and linked by road systems.43 

What exactly was the reason for this ancient Amazonian efﬂorescence?Up until a few decades ago, all these developments were explained as theresult of yet another ‘Agricultural Revolution’. It was supposed that, in theﬁrst millennium BC, intensiﬁed manioc-farming raised Amazonianpopulation levels, generating a wave of human expansion throughout thelowland tropics. The basis for this hypothesis lay in ﬁnds of domesticatedmanioc, dating back as early as 7000 BC; more recently, in southernAmazonia, the cultivation of maize and squash has been traced back tosimilarly early periods.44 Yet there is little evidence for widespreadfarming of these crops in the key period of cultural convergence, beginningaround 500 BC. In fact, manioc only seems to have become a staple cropafter European contact. All this implies that at least some early inhabitantsof Amazonia were well aware of plant domestication but did not select it asthe basis of their economy, opting instead for a more ﬂexible kind ofagroforestry.45 

Modern rainforest agriculture relies on slash-and-burn techniques,labour-intensive methods geared to the extensive cultivation of a smallnumber of crops. The more ancient mode, which we’ve been describing,allowed for a much wider range of cultivars, grown in doorstep gardens orsmall forest clearings close to settlements. Such ancient plant nurseriesrested on special soils (or, more strictly, ‘anthrosols’), which are locallycalled terra preta de índio (‘black earth of the Indians’) and terra mulata (‘brown earth’): dark earths with carrying capacities well in excess ofordinary tropical soils. The dark earths owe their fertility to absorption oforganic by-products such as food residues, excrement and charcoal fromeveryday village life (forming terras pretas) and/or earlier episodes oflocalized burning and cultivation (terras mulatas).46 Soil enrichment in ancient Amazonia was a slow and ongoing process, not an annual task.
‘Play farming’ of this sort, in the Amazon as elsewhere, has had its recentadvantages for indigenous peoples. Elaborate and unpredictable subsistenceroutines are an excellent deterrent against the colonial State: an ecology offreedom in the literal sense. It is difﬁcult to tax and monitor a group thatrefuses to stay in one location, obtaining its livelihood without makinglong-term commitments to ﬁxed resources, or growing much of its foodinvisibly underground (as with tubers and other root vegetables).47 While this may be so, the deeper history of the American tropics shows thatsimilarly loose and ﬂexible patterns of food production sustainedcivilizational growth on a continent-wide scale, long before Europeansarrived. 
In fact, farming of this particular sort (‘low-level food production’ is themore technical term) has characterized a very wide range of Holocenesocieties, including the earliest cultivators of the Fertile Crescent andMesoamerica.48 In Mexico, domestic forms of squash and maize existed by7000 BC.49 Yet these crops only became staple foods around 5,000 yearslater. Similarly, in the Eastern Woodlands of North America local seedcrops were cultivated by 3000 BC, but there was no ‘serious farming’ untilaround AD 1000.50 China follows a similar pattern. Millet-farming beganon a small scale around 8000 BC, on the northern plains, as a seasonalcomplement to foraging and dog-assisted hunting. It remained so for 3,000years, until the introduction of cultivated millets into the basin of theYellow River. Similarly, on the lower and middle reaches of the Yangtze,fully domesticated rice strains only appear ﬁfteen centuries after the ﬁrstcultivation of wild rice in paddy ﬁelds. It might have even taken longerwere it not for a snap of global cooling around 5000 BC, which depletedwild rice stands and nut harvests.51 

In both parts of China, long after their domestication pigs still camesecond to wild boar and deer in terms of dietary signiﬁcance. This was alsothe case in the wooded uplands of the Fertile Crescent, where Çayönü withits House of Skulls is located, and where human–pig relations longremained more a matter of ﬂirtation than full domestication.52 So while it’s tempting to hold Amazonia up as a ‘New World’ alternative to the ‘OldWorld Neolithic’, the truth is that Holocene developments in bothhemispheres are starting to look increasingly similar, at least in terms of theoverall pace of change. And in both cases, they look increasingly un.revolutionary. In the beginning, many of the world’s farming societies wereAmazonian in spirit. They hovered at the threshold of agriculture whileremaining wedded to the cultural values of hunting and foraging. The‘smiling ﬁelds’ of Rousseau’s Discourse still lay far off in the future. 
It may be that further research reveals demographic ﬂuctuations amongearly farming (or forester-farmer) populations in Amazonia, Oceania oreven among the ﬁrst herding peoples of the Nile valley, similar to those now observed for central Europe. Indeed, some sort of decline, or at leastmajor reconﬁguration of settlement, took place in the Fertile Crescent itselfduring the seventh millennium BC.53 At any rate, we shouldn’t be toocategorical about the contrasts among these various regions, given thedifferent amounts of evidence available for each. Still, based on what iscurrently known, we can at least reframe our initial question and ask: whydid Neolithic farmers in certain parts of Europe initially suffer populationcollapse on a scale currently unknown, or undetected elsewhere?
Clues lie in the tiniest of details. 
Cereal-farming, as it turns out, underwent some important changesduring its transfer from Southwest Asia to central Europe via the Balkans.Originally there were three kinds of wheat (einkorn, emmer and freethreshing) and two kinds of barley (hulled and naked) under cultivation, butalso ﬁve different pulses (pea, lentil, bitter vetch, chickpea and grass pea).By contrast, the majority of Linear Pottery sites contain just glume wheats(emmer and einkorn) and one or two kinds of pulse. The Neolithic economyhad become increasingly narrow and uniform, a diminished subset of theMiddle Eastern original. Furthermore, the loess landscapes of centralEurope offered little topographical variability and few opportunities to addnew resources, while dense forager populations limited expansion towardsthe coasts.54 

Almost everything came to revolve around a single food web forEurope’s earliest farmers. Cereal-farming fed the community. Its by.products – chaff and straw – provided fuel, fodder for their animals, as wellas basic materials for construction, including temper for pottery and daubfor houses. Livestock supplied occasional meat, dairy and wool, as well asmanure for gardens.55 With their wattle-and-daub longhouses and sparsematerial culture, these ﬁrst European farming settlements bear a peculiarresemblance to the rural peasant societies of much later eras. Most likely,they were also subject to some of the same weaknesses – not just periodicraiding from the outside, but also internal labour crunches, soil exhaustion,disease and harvest failures across a whole string of like-for-likecommunities, with little scope for mutual aid.
Neolithic farming was an experiment that could fail – and, on occasion,did. 
BUT WHY DOES IT ALL MATTER? (A QUICK REPRISE ON THEDANGERS OF TELEOLOGICAL REASONING) 
In this chapter we have tracked the fate of some of the world’s ﬁrst farmersas they hopped, stumbled and bluffed their way around the globe, withmixed success. But what does this tell us about the overall course of human history? Surely, the sceptical reader might object, what matters in the widerscheme of things are not the ﬁrst faltering steps towards agriculture, but itslong-term effects. After all, by no later than 2000 BC agriculture wassupporting great cities, from China to the Mediterranean; and by 500 BC food-producing societies of one sort or another had colonized pretty muchall of Eurasia, with the exception of southern Africa, the sub-Arctic regionand a handful of subtropical islands.
A sceptic might continue: agriculture alone could unlock the carryingcapacity of lands that foragers were either unable or unwilling to exploit toanything like the same degree. So long as people were willing to give uptheir mobility and settle, even small parcels of arable soil could be made toyield food surpluses, especially once ploughs and irrigation wereintroduced. Even if there were temporary downturns, or even catastrophicfailures, over the long term the odds were surely always stacked in favourof those who could intensify land use to sustain ever larger and denserpopulations. And let’s face it, the same sceptic might conclude, the world’spopulation could only grow from perhaps 5 million at the start of theHolocene to 900 million by AD 1800, and now to billions, because ofagriculture.
How too, for that matter, could such large populations be fed, withoutchains of command to organize the masses, formal ofﬁces of leadership;full-time administrators, soldiers, police, and other non-food-producers,who in turn could only be supported by the surpluses that agricultureprovides? These seem like reasonable questions to ask, and those who makethe ﬁrst point almost invariably make the second. But in doing so, they riskparting company with history. You can’t simply jump from the beginning ofthe story to the end, and then just assume you know what happened in themiddle. Well, you can, but then you are slipping back into the very fairytales we’ve been dealing with throughout this book. So instead, let’s recapvery brieﬂy what we’ve learned about the origins and spread of farming, and then turn to examine some of the more dramatic things that actually didhappen to human societies over the last 5,000 or so years.
Farming, as we can now see, often started out as an economy ofdeprivation: you only invented it when there was nothing else to be done,which is why it tended to happen ﬁrst in areas where wild resources werethinnest on the ground. It was the odd one out in the strategies of the EarlyHolocene, but it had explosive growth potential, especially after domesticlivestock were added to cereal crops. Even so, it was the new kid on theblock. Since the ﬁrst farmers made more rubbish, and often built houses ofbaked mud, they are also more visible to archaeologists. That’s one reasonwhy imaginative in-ﬁlling is necessary if we want to avoid missing theaction going on in much richer environments at the same time, amongpopulations still largely reliant on wild resources.
Seasonally erected monuments like those of Göbekli Tepe or LakeShigirskoe are as clear a signal as one could wish for that big things wereafoot among Holocene hunter-ﬁsher-gatherers. But what were all the non-farming people doing, and where were they living, for the rest of the time?Upland forested areas, like the uplands of eastern Turkey or the foothills ofthe Urals, are one candidate, but since most construction was in wood, verylittle of this habitation survives. Most likely, the largest communities wereconcentrated around lakes, rivers and coastlands, and especially at theirjunctures: delta environments – such as those of southern Mesopotamia, thelower reaches of the Nile and the Indus – where many of the world’s ﬁrstcities arose, and to which we must now turn in order to ﬁnd out exactlywhat living in large and densely populated settlements really did (and didnot) imply for the development of human societies. 

8 

Imaginary Cities 
Eurasia’s ﬁrst urbanites – in Mesopotamia, the Indus valley, Ukraine andChina – and how they built cities without kings 
Cities begin in the mind.
Or so proposed Elias Canetti, a novelist and social philosopher oftenwritten off as one of those offbeat mid-century central European thinkers noone knows quite what to do with. Canetti speculated that Palaeolithichunter-gatherers living in small communities must, inevitably, have spenttime wondering what larger ones would be like. Proof, he felt, was on thewalls of caves, where they faithfully depicted herd animals that movedtogether in uncountable masses. How could they not have wondered whathuman herds might be like, in all their terrible glory? No doubt they alsoconsidered the dead, outnumbering the living by orders of magnitude. Whatif everyone who’d ever died were all in one place? What would that belike? These ‘invisible crowds’, Canetti proposed, were in a sense the ﬁrsthuman cities, even if they existed only in the imagination.
All this might seem idle speculation (in fact, speculation about speculation), but current advances in the study of human cognition suggestthat Canetti had put his ﬁnger on something important, something almosteveryone else had overlooked. Very large social units are always, in a sense,imaginary. Or, to put it in a slightly different way: there is always afundamental distinction between the way one relates to friends, family,neighbourhood, people and places that we actually know directly, and theway one relates to empires, nations and metropolises, phenomena that existlargely, or at least most of the time, in our heads. Much of social theory canbe seen as an attempt to square these two dimensions of our experience. 
In the standard, textbook version of human history, scale is crucial. The tinybands of foragers in which humans were thought to have spent most of theirevolutionary history could be relatively democratic and egalitarian preciselybecause they were small. It’s common to assume – and is often stated asself-evident fact – that our social sensibilities, even our capacity to keeptrack of names and faces, are largely determined by the fact that we spent95 per cent of our evolutionary history in tiny groups of at best a few dozenindividuals. We’re designed to work in small teams. As a result, largeagglomerations of people are often treated as if they were by deﬁnitionsomewhat unnatural, and humans as psychologically ill equipped to handlelife inside them. This is the reason, the argument often goes, that we requiresuch elaborate ‘scaffolding’ to make larger communities work: such thingsas urban planners, social workers, tax auditors and police.1 

If so, it would make perfect sense that the appearance of the ﬁrst cities,the ﬁrst truly large concentrations of people permanently settled in oneplace, would also correspond to the rise of states. For a long time, thearchaeological evidence – from Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, CentralAmerica and elsewhere – did appear to conﬁrm this. If you put enoughpeople in one place, the evidence seemed to show, they would almostinevitably develop writing or something like it, together withadministrators, storage and redistribution facilities, workshops andoverseers. Before long, they would also start dividing themselves into socialclasses. ‘Civilization’ came as a package. It meant misery and suffering forsome (since some would inevitably be reduced to serfs, slaves or debtpeons), but also allowed for the possibility of philosophy, art and theaccumulation of scientiﬁc knowledge.
The evidence no longer suggests anything of the sort. In fact, much ofwhat we have come to learn in the last forty or ﬁfty years has thrownconventional wisdom into disarray. In some regions, we now know, citiesgoverned themselves for centuries without any sign of the temples andpalaces that would only emerge later; in others, temples and palaces neveremerged at all. In many early cities, there is simply no evidence of either aclass of administrators or any other sort of ruling stratum. In others,centralized power seems to appear and then disappear. It would seem thatthe mere fact of urban life does not, necessarily, imply any particular formof political organization, and never did. 
This has all sorts of important implications: for one thing, it suggests amuch less pessimistic assessment of human possibilities, since the mere factthat much of the world’s population now live in cities may not determinehow we live, to anything like the extent you might assume – but before evenstarting to think about that, we need to ask how we got things soextraordinarily wrong to begin with. 
IN WHICH WE FIRST TAKE ON THE NOTORIOUS ISSUE OF ‘SCALE’ 
‘Common sense’ is a peculiar expression. Sometimes it means exactly whatit seems to mean: practical wisdom born of real-life experience, avoidingstupid, obvious pitfalls. This is what we mean when we say that a cartoonvillain who puts a clearly marked ‘self-destruct’ button on his doomsdaydevice, or who fails to block the ventilation passages in his secretheadquarters, is lacking common sense. On the other hand, it occasionallyturns out that things which seem like simple common sense are, in fact, not.
For a long time, it was considered almost universal common sense thatwomen make poor soldiers. After all, it was noted, women tend to besmaller and have less upper-body strength. Then various military forcesmade the experiment and discovered that women also tend to be muchbetter shots. Similarly, it is almost universal common sense that it’srelatively easy for a small group to treat each other as equals and come todecisions democratically, but that the larger the number of people involved,the more difﬁcult this becomes. If you think about it, this isn’t really ascommonsensical as it seems, since it clearly isn’t true of groups that endure.Over time, any group of intimate friends, let alone a family, will eventuallydevelop a complicated history that makes coming to agreement on almostanything difﬁcult; whereas the larger the group, the less likely it is tocontain a signiﬁcant proportion of people you speciﬁcally detest. But forvarious reasons, the problem of scale has now become a matter of simplecommon sense not only to scholars, but to almost everyone else.
Since the problem is typically seen as a result of our evolutionaryinheritance, it might be helpful for a moment to return to the source andconsider how evolutionary psychologists like Robin Dunbar have typicallyframed the question. Most begin by observing that the social organization ofhunter-gatherers – both ancient and modern – operates at different tiers or levels, ‘nested’ inside one another like Russian dolls. The most basic socialunit is the pair-bonded family, with shared investment in offspring. Toprovide for themselves and dependants, these nuclear units are obliged (orso the argument goes) to cluster together in ‘bands’ made up of ﬁve or sixclosely related families. On ritual occasions, or when game is particularlyabundant, such bands coalesce to form ‘residential groups’ (or ‘clans’) ofroughly 150 persons, which – according to Dunbar – is also around theupper limit of stable, trusting relationships we are cognitively able to keeptrack of in our heads. And this, he suggests, is no coincidence. Beyond 150(which has come to be known as ‘Dunbar’s Number’) larger groups such as‘tribes’ may form – but, Dunbar asserts, these larger groups will inevitablylack the solidarity of smaller, kin-based ones, and so conﬂicts will tend toarise within them.2 

Dunbar considers such ‘nested’ arrangements to be among the factorswhich shaped human cognition in deep evolutionary time, such that eventoday a whole plethora of institutions that require high levels of socialcommitment, from military brigades to church congregations, still tend togravitate around the original ﬁgure of 150 relationships. It’s a fascinatinghypothesis. As formulated by evolutionary psychologists, it hinges on theidea that living hunter-gatherers do actually provide evidence for thissupposedly ancient way of scaling social relationships upwards from corefamily units to bands and residential groups, with each larger groupreproducing that same sense of loyalty to one’s natal kin, just on a greaterscale, all the way up to things like ‘brothers’ – or indeed ‘sisters’ – in arms.But here comes the worm in the bud. 
There is an obvious objection to evolutionary models which assume thatour strongest social ties are based on close biological kinship: many humansjust don’t like their families very much. And this appears to be just as trueof present-day hunter-gatherers as anybody else. Many seem to ﬁnd theprospect of living their entire lives surrounded by close relatives sounpleasant that they will travel very long distances just to get away fromthem. New work on the demography of modern hunter-gatherers – drawingstatistical comparisons from a global sample of cases, ranging from theHadza in Tanzania to the Australian Martu3 – shows that residential groupsturn out not to be made up of biological kin at all; and the burgeoning ﬁeldof human genomics is beginning to suggest a similar picture for ancienthunter-gatherers as well, all the way back to the Pleistocene.4 

While modern Martu, for instance, might speak of themselves as if theywere all descended from some common totemic ancestor, it turns out thatprimary biological kin actually make up less than 10 per cent of the totalmembership of any given residential group. Most participants are drawnfrom a much wider pool who do not share close genetic relationships,whose origins are scattered over very large territories, and who may noteven have grown up speaking the same languages. Anyone recognized to beMartu is a potential member of any Martu band, and the same turns out tobe true of the Hadza, BaYaka, !Kung San, and so on. The truly adventurous,meanwhile, can often contrive to abandon their own larger group entirely.This is all the more surprising in places like Australia, where there tend tobe very elaborate kinship systems in which almost all social arrangementsare ostensibly organized around genealogical descent from totemicancestors. 
It would seem, then, that kinship in such cases is really a kind ofmetaphor for social attachments, in much the same way we’d say ‘all menare brothers’ when trying to express internationalism (even if we can’t standour actual brother and haven’t spoken to him for years). What’s more, theshared metaphor often extended over very long distances, as we’ve seenwith the way that Turtle or Bear clans once existed across North America,or moiety systems across Australia. This made it a relatively simple matterfor anyone disenchanted with their immediate biological kin to travel verylong distances and still ﬁnd a welcome.
It is as though modern forager societies exist simultaneously at tworadically different scales: one small and intimate, the other spanning vastterritories, even continents. This might seem odd, but from the perspectiveof cognitive science it makes perfect sense. It’s precisely this capacity toshift between scales that most obviously separates human social cognitionfrom that of other primates.5 Apes may vie for affection or dominance, butany victory is temporary and open to being renegotiated. Nothing isimagined as eternal. Nothing is really imagined at all. Humans tend to livesimultaneously with the 150-odd people they know personally, and insideimaginary structures shared by perhaps millions or even billions of otherhumans. Sometimes, as in the case of modern nations, these are imagined asbeing based on kin ties; sometimes they are not.6 

In this, at least, modern foragers are no different from modern citydwellers or ancient hunter-gatherers. We all have the capacity to feel bound to people we will probably never meet; to take part in a macro-societywhich exists most of the time as ‘virtual reality’, a world of possiblerelationships with its own rules, roles and structures that are held in themind and recalled through the cognitive work of image-making and ritual.Foragers may sometimes exist in small groups, but they do not – andprobably have not ever – lived in small-scale societies.7 

None of which is to say that scale – in the sense of absolute populationsize – makes no difference at all. What it means is that these things do notnecessarily matter in the seemingly common-sense sort of way we tend toassume. On this particular point, at least, Canetti had it right. Mass societyexists in the mind before it becomes physical reality. And crucially, it alsoexists in the mind after it becomes physical reality.
At this point we can return to cities. 
Cities are tangible things. Certain elements of their physical infrastructure –walls, roads, parks, sewers – might remain ﬁxed for hundreds or eventhousands of years; but in human terms they are never stable. People areconstantly moving in and out of them, whether permanently, or seasonallyfor holidays and festivals, to visit relatives, trade, raid, tour around, and soon; or just in the course of their daily rounds. Yet cities have a life thattranscends all this. This is not because of the permanence of stone or brickor adobe; neither is it because most people in a city actually meet oneanother. It is because they will often think and act as people who belong to the city – as Londoners or Muscovites or Calcuttans. As the urbansociologist Claude Fischer put it: 
Most city dwellers lead sensible, circumscribed lives, rarely go
downtown, hardly know areas of the city they neither live nor work
in, and see (in any sociologically meaningful way) only a tiny
fraction of the city’s population. Certainly, they may on occasion –
during rush hours, football games, etc. – be in the presence of
thousands of strangers, but that does not necessarily have any direct
effect on their personal lives … urbanites live in small social worlds
that touch but do not interpenetrate.8 

All this applies in equal measure to ancient cities. Aristotle, for example,insisted that Babylon was so large that, two or three days after it had been captured by a foreign army, some parts of the city still hadn’t heard thenews. In other words, from the perspective of someone living in an ancientcity, the city itself was not so entirely different from earlier landscapes ofclans or moieties that extended across hundreds of miles. It was a structure raised primarily in the human imagination, which allowed for the possibilityof amicable relations with people they had never met.
In Chapter Four we suggested that for much of human history, thegeographical range in which most human beings were operating wasactually shrinking. Palaeolithic ‘culture areas’ spanned continents.Mesolithic and Neolithic culture zones still covered much wider areas than the home territory of most contemporary ethno-linguistic groups (whatanthropologists refer to as ‘cultures’). Cities were part of that process ofcontraction, since urbanites could, and many did, spend almost their entirelives within a few miles’ radius – something that would hardly have beenconceivable for people of an earlier age. One way to think about this wouldbe to imagine a vast regional system, of the kind that once spanned much ofAustralia or North America, being squeezed into a single urban space –while still maintaining its virtual quality. If that is even roughly whathappened when the earliest cities formed, then there’s no reason to assumethere were any special cognitive challenges involved. Living in unbounded,eternal, largely imaginary groups is effectively what humans had beendoing all along.
So what was really new here? Let’s go back to the archaeologicalevidence. Settlements inhabited by tens of thousands of people make theirﬁrst appearance in human history around 6000 years ago, on almost everycontinent, at ﬁrst in isolation. Then they multiply. One of the things thatmakes it so difﬁcult to ﬁt what we now know about them into an old-fashioned evolutionary sequence, where cities, states, bureaucracies andsocial classes all emerge together,9 is just how different these cities are. It’snot just that some early cities lack class divisions, wealth monopolies, orhierarchies of administration. They exhibit such extreme variability as toimply, from the very beginning, a conscious experimentation in urban form.
Contemporary archaeology shows, among other things, that surprisinglyfew of these early cities contain signs of authoritarian rule. It also showsthat their ecology was far more diverse than once believed: cities do notnecessarily depend on a rural hinterland in which serfs or peasants engagein back-breaking labour, hauling in cartloads of grain for consumption by urban dwellers. Certainly, that situation became increasingly typical in laterages, but in the ﬁrst cities small-scale gardening and animal-keeping wereoften at least as important; so too were the resources of rivers and seas, andfor that matter the continued hunting and collecting of wild seasonal foodsin forests or in marshes. The particular mix depended largely on where inthe world the cities happened to be, but it’s becoming increasingly apparentthat history’s ﬁrst city dwellers did not always leave a harsh footprint on theenvironment, or on each other. 
What were these early cities like to live in?
In what follows we’ll mainly describe what happened in Eurasia, beforemoving over to Mesoamerica in the next chapter. Of course, the whole storycould be told from other geographical perspectives (that of sub-SaharanAfrica, for instance, where local trajectories of urban development in theMiddle Niger delta stretch back long before the spread of Islam), but thereis only so much one can cover in a single volume without doing excessiveviolence to the subject.10 Each region we consider presents a distinct rangeof source material for the archaeologist or historian to sift and weigh. Inmost cases, written evidence is either lacking or extremely limited in scope.(We are still talking here, for the most part, about very early periods ofhuman history, and cultural traditions very different from our own.)
We may never be able to reconstruct in any detail the unwrittenconstitutions of the world’s ﬁrst cities, or the upheavals that appear to haveperiodically changed them. Still, what evidence does exist is robust enough,not just to upend the conventional narrative but to open our eyes topossibilities we would otherwise never have considered. Before looking atspeciﬁc cases, we should at least brieﬂy consider why cities ever appearedin the ﬁrst place. Did the sort of temporary, seasonal aggregation sites wediscussed in earlier chapters gradually become permanent, year-roundsettlements? That would be a gratifyingly simple story. Unfortunately, itdoesn’t seem to be what happened. The reality is more complex and, asusual, a good deal more interesting. 
IN WHICH WE SET THE SCENE BROADLY FOR A WORLD OF CITIES, AND SPECULATE AS TO WHY THEY FIRST AROSE 
Wherever cities emerged, they deﬁned a new phase of world history.11 
Let’s call it the ‘early urban world’, an admittedly bland term for what wasin many ways a strange phase of the human past. Perhaps it is one of thehardest for us now to grasp, since it was simultaneously so familiar and soalien. We will consider the familiar parts ﬁrst.
Almost everywhere, in these early cities, we ﬁnd grand, self-consciousstatements of civic unity, the arrangement of built spaces in harmonious andoften beautiful patterns, clearly reﬂecting some kind of planning at themunicipal scale. Where we do have written sources (ancient Mesopotamia,for example), we ﬁnd large groups of citizens referring to themselves, not inthe idiom of kinship or ethnic ties, but simply as ‘the people’ of a given city(or often its ‘sons and daughters’), united by devotion to its foundingancestors, its gods or heroes, its civic infrastructure and ritual calendar,which always involves at least some occasions for popular festivity.12 
Civic festivals were moments when the imaginary structures to whichpeople deferred in their daily lives, but which couldn’t normally be seen,temporarily took on tangible, material form.
Where there is evidence to be had, we also ﬁnd differences. People wholived in cities often came from far away. The great city of Teotihuacan inthe Valley of Mexico was already attracting residents from such distantareas as Yucatán and the Gulf Coast in the third or fourth century AD;migrants settled there in their own neighbourhoods, including a possibleMaya district. Immigrants from across the great ﬂoodplains of the Indusburied their loved ones in the cemeteries of Harappa. Typically, ancientcities divided themselves into quarters, which often developed enduringrivalries, and this seems to have been true of the very ﬁrst cities. Markedout by walls, gates or ditches, consolidated neighbourhoods of this sortwere probably not different in any fundamental respect from their modern counterparts.13 

What makes these cities strange, at least to us, is largely what isn’t there.This is especially true of technology, whether advanced metallurgy,intensive agriculture, social technologies like administrative records, oreven the wheel. Any one of these things may, or may not, have beenpresent, depending where in this early urban world we cast our gaze. Hereit’s worth recalling that in most of the Americas, before the Europeaninvasion, there were neither metal tools nor horses, donkeys, camels oroxen. All movement of people and things was either by foot, canoe or travois. But the scale of pre-Columbian capitals like Teotihuacan orTenochtitlan dwarfs that of the earliest cities in China and Mesopotamia,and makes the ‘city-states’ of Bronze Age Greece (like Tiryns andMycenae) seem little more than fortiﬁed hamlets.
In point of fact, the largest early cities, those with the greatestpopulations, did not appear in Eurasia – with its many technical andlogistical advantages – but in Mesoamerica, which had no wheeled vehiclesor sailing ships, no animal-powered traction or transport, and much less inthe way of metallurgy or literate bureaucracy. This raises an obviousquestion: why did so many end up living in the same place to begin with?The conventional story looks for the ultimate causes in technologicalfactors: cities were a delayed, but inevitable, effect of the ‘AgriculturalRevolution’, which started populations on an upward trajectory and set off achain of other developments, for instance in transport and administration,which made it possible to support large populations living in one place.These large populations then required states to administer them. As we’veseen, neither part of this story seems to be borne out by the facts.
Indeed, it’s hard to ﬁnd a single story. Teotihuacan, for instance, appearsto have become such a large city, peaking at perhaps 100,000 souls, mainlybecause a series of volcanic eruptions and related natural disasters droveentire populations out of their homelands to settle there.14 Ecologicalfactors often played a role in the formation of cities, but in this particularcase these would appear to be only obliquely related to the intensiﬁcation ofagriculture. Still, there are hints of a pattern. Across many parts of Eurasia,and in a few parts of the Americas, the appearance of cities follows quiteclosely on a secondary, post-Ice Age shufﬂing of the ecological pack whichstarted around 5000 BC. At least two environmental changes were at workhere. 
The ﬁrst concerns rivers. At the beginning of the Holocene, the world’sgreat rivers were mostly still wild and unpredictable. Then, around 7,000years ago, ﬂood regimes started changing, giving way to more settledroutines. This is what created wide and highly fertile ﬂoodplains along theYellow River, the Indus, the Tigris and other rivers that we associate withthe ﬁrst urban civilizations. Parallel to this, the melting of polar glaciersslowed down in the Middle Holocene to a point that allowed sea levels theworld over to stabilize, at least to a greater degree than they ever hadbefore. The combined effect of these two processes was dramatic; especially where great rivers met the open waters, depositing their seasonalloads of fertile silt faster than seawaters could push them back. This was theorigin of those great fan-like deltas we see today at the head of theMississippi, the Nile or the Euphrates, for instance.15 

Comprising well-watered soils, annually sifted by river action, and richwetland and waterside habitats favoured by migratory game and waterfowl,such deltaic environments were major attractors for human populations.Neolithic farmers gravitated to them, along with their crops and livestock.Hardly surprising, considering these were effectively scaled-up versions ofthe kind of river, spring and lakeside environments in which Neolithichorticulture ﬁrst began, but with one other major difference: just over thehorizon lay the open sea, and before it expansive marshlands supplyingaquatic resources to buffer the risks of farming, as well as a perennialsource of organic materials (reeds, ﬁbres, silt) to support construction andmanufacturing.16 

All this, combined with the fertility of alluvial soils further inland,promoted the growth of more specialized forms of farming in Eurasia,including the use of animal-drawn ploughs (also adopted in Egypt by 3000 BC), and the breeding of sheep for wool. Extensive agriculture may thushave been an outcome, not a cause, of urbanization.17 Choices about which crops and animals to farm often had less to do with brute subsistence thanthe burgeoning industries of early cities, notably textile production, as wellas popular forms of urban cuisine such as alcoholic drinks, leavened breadand dairy products. Hunters and foragers, ﬁshers and fowlers were no lessimportant to these new urban economies than farmers and shepherds.18 
Peasantries, on the other hand, were a later, secondary development.
Wetlands and ﬂoodplains are no friends to archaeological survival. Often,these earliest phases of urban occupation lie beneath later deposits of silt, orthe remains of cities grown over them. In many parts of the world, the ﬁrstavailable evidence relates to an already mature phase of urban expansion:by the time the picture comes into focus, we already see a marshmetropolis, or network of centres, out-scaling all previous knownsettlements by a factor of ten to one. Some of these cities in formerwetlands have only emerged very recently into historical view – virginbirths from the bulrushes. The results are often striking, and theirimplications still unclear. 
We now know, for instance, that in China’s Shandong province, on thelower reaches of the Yellow River, settlements of 300 hectares or more –such as Liangchengzhen and Yaowangcheng – were present by no later than2500 BC, which is over 1,000 years before the earliest royal dynastiesdeveloped on the Central Chinese plains. On the other side of the Paciﬁc,around the same time, ceremonial centres of great magnitude developed inthe valley of Peru’s Rio Supe, notably at the site of Caral, wherearchaeologists have uncovered sunken plazas and monumental platformsfour millennia older than the Inca Empire.19 The extent of human habitation around these great centres is still to be determined.
These new ﬁndings show that archaeologists still have much to ﬁnd outabout the distribution of the world’s ﬁrst cities. They also indicate howmuch older those cities may be than the systems of authoritariangovernment and literate administration that were once assumed necessaryfor their foundation. Similar revelations are emerging from the Mayalowlands, where ceremonial centres of truly enormous size – and, so far,presenting no evidence of monarchy or stratiﬁcation – can now be datedback as far as 1000 BC: more than 1,000 years before the rise of ClassicMaya kings, whose royal cities were notably smaller in scale.20 This, inturn, raises a fascinating but difﬁcult question. What held the earliestexperiments in urbanization together, other than reeds, ﬁbres and clay?What was their social glue? It is high time for some examples but, beforewe examine the great valley civilizations of the Tigris, Indus and YellowRivers, we will ﬁrst visit the interior grasslands of eastern Europe. 
ON ‘MEGA-SITES’, AND HOW ARCHAEOLOGICAL FINDINGSIN UKRAINE ARE OVERTURNING CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ON THE ORIGINS OF CITIES 
The remote history of the countries around the Black Sea is awash withgold. At least, any casual visitor to the major museums of Soﬁa, Kiev orTbilisi could be forgiven for leaving with this impression. Ever since thedays of Herodotus, outsiders to the region have come home full of luridtales about the lavish funerals of warrior-kings, and the mass slaughter ofhorses and retainers that accompanied them. Over 1,000 years later, in thetenth century AD, the traveller Ibn Fadlan was telling almost identical storiesto impress and titillate his Arab readers. 
As a result, in these lands the term ‘prehistory’ (or sometimes ‘proto.history’) has always evoked the legacy of aristocratic tribes and lavishtombs crammed with treasure. Such tombs are, certainly, there to be found.On the region’s western ﬂank, in Bulgaria, they begin with the gold-soakedcemetery of Varna, oddly placed in what regional archaeologists refer to asthe Copper Age, corresponding to the ﬁfth millennium BC. To the east, insouthernmost Russia, a tradition of extravagant funeral rites began shortlyafter, associated with burial mounds known as kurgans, which do indeedmark the resting places of warrior princes of one sort or another.21 

But it turns out this wasn’t the whole story. In fact, magniﬁcent warriortombs might not even be the most interesting aspect of the region’sprehistory. There were also cities. Archaeologists in Ukraine and Moldovagot their ﬁrst inkling of them in the 1970s, when they began to detect theexistence of human settlements older and much larger than anything theyhad previously encountered.22 Further research showed that these settlements, often referred to as ‘mega-sites’ – with their modern names ofTaljanky, Maidenetske, Nebelivka and so on – dated to the early and middlecenturies of the fourth millennium BC, which meant that some existed evenbefore the earliest known cities in Mesopotamia. They were also larger in area. 
Yet, even now, in scholarly discussions about the origins of urbanism,these Ukrainian sites almost never come up. Indeed, the very use of theterm ‘mega-site’ is a kind of euphemism, signalling to a wider audience thatthese should not be thought of as proper cities but as something more likevillages that for some reason had expanded inordinately in size. Somearchaeologists even refer to them outright as ‘overgrown villages’. How dowe account for this reluctance to welcome the Ukrainian mega-sites into thecharmed circle of urban origins? Why has anyone with even a passinginterest in the origin of cities heard of Uruk or Mohenjo-daro, but almost noone of Taljanky?
The answer is largely political. Some of it concerns simple geopolitics:much of the initial work of discovery was carried out by Eastern Blocscholars during the Cold War, which not only slowed down the reception oftheir ﬁndings in Western academic circles but tended to tinge any news ofsurprising discoveries with at least a tiny bit of scepticism. Even more,perhaps, it had to do with the internal political life of the prehistoricsettlements themselves. That is, according to conventional views of politics, there didn’t seem to be any. No evidence was unearthed of centralizedgovernment or administration – or indeed, any form of ruling class. In otherwords, these enormous settlements had all the hallmarks of whatevolutionists would call a ‘simple’, not a ‘complex’ society.
It’s hard here not to recall Ursula Le Guin’s famous short story ‘TheOnes Who Walk Away from Omelas’, about the imaginary city of Omelas,a city which also made do without kings, wars, slaves or secret police. Wehave a tendency, Le Guin notes, to write off such a community as ‘simple’,but in fact these citizens of Omelas were ‘not simple folk, not dulcetshepherds, noble savages, bland utopians. They were not less complex thanus.’ The trouble is just that ‘we have a bad habit, encouraged by pedantsand sophisticates, of considering happiness as something rather stupid.’
Le Guin has a point. Obviously, we have no idea how relatively happythe inhabitants of Ukrainian mega-sites like Maidenetske or Nebelivkawere, compared to the lords who constructed kurgan burials, or even theretainers ritually sacriﬁced at their funerals; or the bonded labourers whoprovided wheat and barley to the inhabitants of later Greek colonies alongthe Black Sea coast (though we can guess), and as anyone who has read thestory knows, Omelas had some problems too. But the point remains: whydo we assume that people who have ﬁgured out a way for a large populationto govern and support itself without temples, palaces and militaryfortiﬁcations – that is, without overt displays of arrogance, self-abasementand cruelty – are somehow less complex than those who have not?
Why would we hesitate to dignify such a place with the name of ‘city’?
The mega-sites of Ukraine and adjoining regions were inhabited fromroughly 4100 to 3300 BC, that is, for something in the order of eightcenturies, which is considerably longer than most subsequent urbantraditions. Why were they there at all? Like the cities of Mesopotamia andthe Indus valley, they appear to have been born of ecological opportunismin the middle phase of the Holocene. Not ﬂoodplain dynamics, in this case,but processes of soil formation on the ﬂatlands north of the Black Sea.These black earths (Russian: chernozem) are legendary for their fertility; forthe empires of later antiquity, they made the lands between the SouthernBug and Dniepr Rivers a breadbasket (which is why Greek city-statesestablished colonies in the region and enslaved or made serfs of the localpopulations to begin with: ancient Athens was largely fed by Black Seagrain). 
By 4500 BC, chernozem was widely distributed between the Carpathianand the Ural Mountains, where a mosaic landscape of open prairie andwoodland emerged capable of supporting dense human habitation.23 The Neolithic people who settled there had travelled east from the lower reachesof the Danube, passing through the Carpathian Mountains. We do not knowwhy, but we do know that – throughout their peregrinations in river valleysand mountain passes – they retained a cohesive social identity. Theirvillages, often small in scale, shared similar cultural practices, reﬂected inthe forms taken by their dwellings, female ﬁgurines and ways of makingand serving food. The archaeological name given to this particular ‘designfor life’ is the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture, after the sites where it was ﬁrstrecorded.24 

So the Ukrainian and Moldovan mega-sites did not come out of thin air.They were the physical realization of an extended community that alreadyexisted long before its constituent units coalesced into large settlements.Some tens of these settlements have now been documented. The biggestcurrently known – Taljanky – extends over an area of 300 hectares,outspanning the earliest phases of the city of Uruk in southernMesopotamia. It presents no evidence of central administration orcommunal storage facilities. Nor have any government buildings,fortiﬁcations or monumental architecture been found. There is no acropolisor civic centre; no equivalent to Uruk’s raised public district called Eanna(‘House of Heaven’) or the Great Bath of Mohenjo-daro.
What we do ﬁnd are houses; well over 1,000 in the case of Taljanky.Rectangular houses, sixteen or so feet wide and twice as long, built ofwattle and daub on timber frames, with stone foundations. With theirattached gardens, these houses form such neat circular patterns that from abird’s-eye view, any mega-site resembles the inside of a tree trunk: greatrings, with concentric spaces between. The innermost ring frames a big gapin the middle of the settlement, where early excavators at ﬁrst expected toﬁnd something dramatic, whether magniﬁcent buildings or grand burials.But in every known case, the central area is simply empty; guesses for itsfunction range from popular assemblies to ceremonies or the seasonalpenning of animals – or possibly all three.25 In consequence, the standardarchaeological plan of a Ukrainian mega-site is all ﬂesh, no core.
Just as surprising as their scale is the distribution of these massivesettlements, which are all quite close to each other, at most six to nine miles apart.26 Their total population – estimated in the many thousands permega-site, and probably well over 10,000 in some cases – would thereforehave had to draw resources from a common hinterland. Yet their ecologicalfootprint appears to have been surprisingly light.27 There are a number of possible explanations. Some have suggested the mega-sites were onlyoccupied part of the year, even for just a season,28 making them urban-scale versions of the kind of temporary aggregation sites we discussed inChapter Three. This is difﬁcult to reconcile with the substantial nature of 
their houses (consider the effort expended in felling trees, layingfoundations, making good walls etc.). More probably, the mega-sites weremuch like most other cities, neither permanently inhabited nor strictlyseasonal, but somewhere in between.29 



We should also consider if the inhabitants of the mega-sites consciouslymanaged their ecosystem to avoid large-scale deforestation. This isconsistent with archaeological studies of their economy, which suggest apattern of small-scale gardening, often taking place within the bounds of thesettlement, combined with the keeping of livestock, cultivation of orchards,and a wide spectrum of hunting and foraging activities. The diversity isactually remarkable, as is its sustainability. As well as wheat, barley andpulses, the citizens’ plant diet included apples, pears, cherries, sloes, acorns,hazelnuts and apricots. Mega-site dwellers were hunters of red deer, roedeer and wild boar as well as farmers and foresters. It was ‘play farming’ ona grand scale: an urban populus supporting itself through small-scalecultivation and herding, combined with an extraordinary array of wildfoods.30 

This way of life was by no means ‘simple’. As well as managingorchards, gardens, livestock and woodlands, the inhabitants of these citiesimported salt in bulk from springs in the eastern Carpathians and the BlackSea littoral. Flint extraction by the ton took place in the Dniestr valley,furnishing material for tools. A household potting industry ﬂourished, itsproducts considered among the ﬁnest ceramics of the prehistoric world; andregular supplies of copper ﬂowed in from the Balkans.31 There is no ﬁrm consensus among archaeologists about what sort of social arrangements allthis required, but most would agree the logistical challenges were daunting.A surplus was deﬁnitely produced, and with it ample potential for some toseize control of the stocks and supplies, to lord it over others or battle forthe spoils; but over eight centuries we ﬁnd little evidence for warfare or therise of social elites. The true complexity of the mega-sites lies in thestrategies they adopted to prevent such things. 
How did it all work? In the absence of written records (or a time machine),there are serious limits to what we can say about kinship and inheritance, orhow people in these cities went about making collective decisions.32 Still,some clues exist, beginning at the level of individual households. Each ofthese had a roughly common plan, but each was also, in its own way, unique. From one dwelling to the next there is constant innovation, evenplayfulness, in the rules of commensality. Each family unit invented its ownslight variations on domestic rituals, reﬂected in its unique assemblage ofserving and eating vessels, painted with polychrome designs of oftenmesmerizing intensity and made in a dazzling variety of forms. It’s as ifevery household was an artists’ collective which invented its own uniqueaesthetic style.
Some of this household pottery evokes the bodies of women; and amongthe other items most commonly found within the remains of houses arefemale ﬁgurines of clay. Model houses and tiny replicas of furniture andeating equipment also survive – miniature representations of lost socialworlds, again, afﬁrming the prominent role of women within them.33 All this tells us a little about the cultural atmosphere of these households (andone can easily see why Marija Gimbutas, whose syntheses of Eurasianprehistory we discussed earlier, considered the Cucuteni-Tripolye culture tobe part of ‘Old Europe’, with its cultural roots in the early farming societiesof Anatolia and the Middle East). But how did these households cometogether in such numbers to form the great concentric arrangements whichgive the Ukrainian mega-sites their distinctive plan?
The ﬁrst impression of these sites is one of rigid uniformity, a closedcircuit of social interaction, but closer study reveals constant deviation fromthe norm. Individual households would sometimes opt to cluster together ingroups of between three and ten families. Ditches or pits marked theirboundaries. At some sites these groups coalesce into neighbourhoods,radiating out from the centre to the perimeter of the city, and even forminglarger residential districts or quarters. Each had access to at least oneassembly house, a structure larger than an ordinary dwelling where a widersector of the population might gather periodically for activities we can onlyguess at (political meetings? legal proceedings? seasonal festivities?).34 

Careful analysis by archaeologists shows how the apparent uniformity ofthe Ukrainian mega-sites arose from the bottom up, through processes oflocal decision-making.35 This would have to mean that members of individual households – or at least, their neighbourhood representatives –shared a conceptual framework for the settlement as a whole. We can alsosafely infer that this framework was based on the image of a circle and itsproperties of transformation. To understand how the citizens put this mentalimage into effect, translating it into a workable social reality at such enormous scales, we cannot rely on archaeology alone. Fortunately, theburgeoning ﬁeld of ethno-mathematics shows exactly how such a systemmight have worked in practice. The most informative case we know of isthat of traditional Basque settlements in the highlands of the Pyrénées-Atlantiques.
These modern Basque societies – tucked down in the southwest corner ofFrance – also imagine their communities in circular form, just as theyimagine themselves as being surrounded by a circle of mountains. They doso as a way of emphasizing the ideal equality of households and familyunits. Now, obviously, the social arrangements of these existingcommunities are unlikely to be quite the same as those of ancient Ukraine.Nonetheless, they provide an excellent illustration of how such circulararrangements can form part of self-conscious egalitarian projects, in which‘everyone has neighbours to the left and neighbours to the right. No one isﬁrst, and no one is last.’36 

In the commune of Sainte-Engrâce, for instance, the circular template ofthe village is also a dynamic model used as a counting device, to ensure theseasonal rotation of essential tasks and duties. Each Sunday, one householdwill bless two loaves at the local church, eat one, then present the other toits ‘ﬁrst neighbour’ (the house to their right); the next week that neighbourwill do the same to the next house to its right, and so on in a clockwisedirection, so that in a community of 100 households it would take about twoyears to complete a full cycle.37 

As so often with such matters, there is an entire cosmology, a theory ofthe human condition, baked in, as it were: the loaves are spoken of as‘semen’, as something that gives life; meanwhile, care for the dead anddying travels in the opposite, counter-clockwise direction. But the system isalso the basis for economic co-operation. If any one household is for anyreason unable to fulﬁl its obligations when it is time to do so, a carefulsystem of substitution comes into play, so neighbours at ﬁrst, second andsometimes third remove can temporarily take their place. This in turnprovides the model for virtually all forms of co-operation. The same systemof ‘ﬁrst neighbours’ and substitution, the same serial model of reciprocity,is used to call up anything that requires more hands than a single family canprovide: from planting and harvesting to cheese-making and slaughteringpigs. It follows that households cannot simply schedule their daily labour inline with their own needs. They also have to consider their obligations to other households, which in turn have their own obligations to other,different households, and so on. Factoring in that some tasks – such asmoving ﬂocks to highland pastures, or the demands of milking, shearingand guarding herds – may require the combined efforts of ten differenthouseholds, and that households have to balance the scheduling ofnumerous different sorts of commitment, we begin to get a sense of thecomplexities involved.
In other words, such ‘simple’ economies are rarely all that simple. Theyoften involve logistical challenges of striking complexity, resolved on abasis of intricate systems of mutual aid, all without any need of centralizedcontrol or administration. Basque villagers in this region are self-consciousegalitarians, in the sense that they insist each household is ultimately thesame and has the same responsibilities as any others; yet rather thangoverning themselves through communal assemblies (which earliergenerations of Basque townsfolk famously created in places like Guernica),they rely on mathematical principles such as rotation, serial replacementand alternation. But the end result is the same, and the system ﬂexibleenough that changes in the number of households or the capacities of theirindividual members can be continually taken into account, ensuringrelations of equality are preserved over the long term, with an almostcomplete absence of internal conﬂict.
There is no reason to assume that such a system would only work on asmall scale: a village of 100 households is already way beyond Dunbar’sproposed cognitive threshold of 150 people (the number of stable, trustingrelationships we are able to keep track of in our minds, before – according,that is, to Dunbar – we are obliged to start putting chiefs and administratorsin charge of social affairs); and Basque villages and towns used to be farlarger than this. One can at least begin to see how – in a different context –such egalitarian systems might scale up to communities of many hundredsor even thousands of households. Returning to the Ukrainian mega-sites, wemust admit that much remains unknown. Around the middle of the fourth millennium BC, most of them were basically abandoned. We still don’tknow why. What they offer us, in the meantime, is signiﬁcant: proof thathighly egalitarian organization has been possible on an urban scale.38 With this in mind, we can look with fresh eyes at some better-known cases fromother parts of Eurasia. Let’s start with Mesopotamia. 
ON MESOPOTAMIA, AND ‘NOT-SO-PRIMITIVE’ DEMOCRACY 
‘Mesopotamia’ means ‘land between the two rivers’. Archaeologistssometimes also call this region the ‘heartland of cities’.39 Its ﬂoodplainscross the otherwise arid landscape of southern Iraq, turning to marshland asthey near the head of the Persian Gulf.40 Urban life here goes back at leastto 3500 BC. In the more northerly lands between the Tigris and Euphrates,where the rivers ﬂow through rain-fed plains, the history of cities may goeven further back, beyond 4000 BC.41 

Unlike the Ukrainian mega-sites, or the Bronze Age cities of the Indusvalley to which we’ll turn shortly, Mesopotamia was already part of modernmemory before any archaeologist put a spade into one of its ancientmounds.42 Anyone who had read the Bible knew about the kingdoms ofBabylonia and Assyria; and in the Victorian era of high empire, biblicalscholars and Orientalists began excavating sites with scriptural associations,like Nineveh and Nimrud, hoping to uncover cities ruled by ﬁgures oflegend such as Nebuchadnezzar, Sennacherib or Tiglath-Pileser. They didﬁnd these; but in those places and elsewhere they discovered other thingsthat were even more spectacular, like a basalt stela bearing the law code ofHammurabi, ruler of Babylon in the eighteenth century BC, unearthed atSusa in western Iran; clay tablets from Nineveh bearing copies of the Epicof Gilgamesh, fabled ruler of Uruk; and the Royal Tombs of Ur in southernIraq, where kings and queens unknown to the Bible were interred withstartling riches and the remains of sacriﬁced retainers around 2500 BC. 
There were even bigger surprises. The oldest remains of cities andkingdoms – including the Royal Tombs of Ur – belonged to a culturepreviously unknown, and not mentioned in scripture: the Sumerians, whoused a language unrelated to the Semitic family from which Hebrew andArabic derive.43 (In fact, as in the case of Basque, there’s no consensus onwhat language family Sumerian does belong to.) But in general, the ﬁrstdecades of archaeological work in the region, from the late nineteenth to theearly twentieth century, conﬁrmed an expected association of ancientMesopotamia with empire and monarchy. The Sumerians, at least on ﬁrstsighting, seemed no exception.44 In fact, they set the tone. Such was publicinterest in the ﬁndings from Ur that in the 1920s the Illustrated London News (England’s ‘window on the world’) devoted no less than thirty featurearticles to Leonard Woolley’s excavation of the Royal Tombs. 
All this reinforced a popular picture of Mesopotamia as a civilization ofcities, monarchy and aristocracy, all tinged with the excitement ofuncovering the ‘truth’ behind biblical scripture (‘Ur of the Chaldees,’ aswell as being a Sumerian city, appears in the Hebrew Bible as the birthplaceof the patriarch Abraham). But one of the major accomplishments ofmodern archaeology and epigraphy has been to redraw this picture entirely:to show that Mesopotamia was never, in fact, an eternal ‘land of kings’. Thereal story is far more complicated. 
The earliest Mesopotamian cities – those of the fourth and early thirdmillennia BC – present no clear evidence for monarchy at all. Now, youmight object, it’s difﬁcult to prove for certain that something isn’t there. However, we know what evidence for monarchy in such cities would belike, because half a millennium later (from around 2800 BC onwards)monarchy starts popping up everywhere: palaces, aristocratic burials androyal inscriptions, along with defensive walls for cities and organizedmilitia to guard them. But the birth of cities, and with it the basic elementsof Mesopotamian civic life – the ancient building blocks of its urban society
– begin considerably before this ‘Early Dynastic’ period.
These original urban elements include some which have been wronglycharacterized as inventions of royal statecraft, such as the institution thathistorians call by the French term corvée. This refers to obligatory labouron civic projects exacted from free citizens on a seasonal basis, and it hasalways been assumed to be a form of tax extracted by powerful rulers: taxespaid not in goods, but in services. From a Mesopotamian perspective,though, corvée was already very ancient. As old as humanity itself. Theﬂood-myth Atrahasis – the prototype for the Old Testament story of Noah –tells how the gods ﬁrst created people to perform corvée on their behalf.Mesopotamian gods were unusually hands-on, and had originally workedthemselves. Eventually tiring of digging irrigation canals, they createdminor deities to do the work, but they too rebelled, and – receiving a muchmore favourable hearing than Lucifer would in Heaven – the gods concededto their demands and created people.45 

Everyone had to do corvée. Even the most powerful Mesopotamian rulersof later periods had to heave a basket of clay to the construction site of animportant temple. The Sumerian word for corvée (dubsig) refers to thisbasket of earth, written with a pictogram showing a person lifting it on to their head, like kings do on monuments such as the Plaque of Ur-Nanshe,carved around 2500 BC. Free citizens performed dubsig for weeks or even months. When they did, high-ranking clerics and administrators workedalongside artisans, shepherds and cereal farmers. Later kings could grantexemptions, allowing the rich to pay tax in lieu, or employ others to do thework for them. Still, all contributed in some way.46 

Royal hymns describe the ‘happy faces’ and ‘joyous hearts’ of corvéeworkers. No doubt there’s an element of propaganda here, but it’s clear that,even in periods of monarchy and empire, these seasonal projects wereundertaken in a festive spirit, labourers receiving copious rewards of bread,beer, dates, cheese and meat. There was also something of the carnivalabout them. They were occasions when the moral order of the city spun onits axis, and distinctions between citizens dissolved away. The ‘Hymns ofGudea’ – the governor (ensi) of the city-state of Lagash – conveysomething of the atmosphere in which they took place. Dating from aroundthe end of the third millennium BC, they eulogize the restoration of a templecalled Eninnu, the House of Ningirsu, patron deity of the city: 
Women did not carry baskets,only the top warriors did the buildingfor him; the whip did not strike;mother did not hit her (disobedient) child;The general,The colonel,The captain,(and) the conscript,they (all) shared the work equally;the supervision indeed was (like)soft wool in their hands.47 

More lasting beneﬁts for the citizenry at large included debt cancellation bythe governor.48 Times of labour mobilization were thus seen as moments of absolute equality before the gods – when even slaves might be placed on anequal footing to their masters – as well as times when the imaginary citybecame real, as its inhabitants shed their day-to-day identities as bakers ortavern keepers or inhabitants of such and such a neighbourhood, or latergenerals or slaves, and brieﬂy assembled to become ‘the people’ of Lagash, or Kish, Eridu, or Larsa as they built or rebuilt some part of the city or thenetwork of irrigation canals that sustained it.
If this is at least partly how cities were built, it’s hard to write suchfestivals off as pure symbolic display. What’s more, there were otherinstitutions, also said to originate in the Predynastic age, which ensured thatordinary citizens had a signiﬁcant hand in government. Even the mostautocratic rulers of later city-states were answerable to a panoply of towncouncils, neighbourhood wards and assemblies – in all of which womenoften participated alongside men.49 The ‘sons and daughters’ of a citycould make their voices heard, inﬂuencing everything from taxation toforeign policy. These urban assemblies might not have been so powerful asthose of ancient Greece – but, on the other hand, slavery was not nearly sodeveloped in Mesopotamia, and women were not excluded from politics toanything like the same degree.50 In diplomatic correspondence, we alsocatch occasional glimpses of corporate bodies rising up against unpopularrulers or policies, often successfully.
The term used by modern scholars for this general state of affairs is‘primitive democracy’. It’s not a very good term, since there’s no particularreason to think any of these institutions were in any way crude orunsophisticated. Arguably, the continued use of this odd term by researchershas inhibited wider discussion, which remains mostly conﬁned to thespecialist ﬁeld of Assyriology: the study of ancient Mesopotamia and itswritten legacy in the cuneiform script. Let’s take a closer look at theargument, and some of its implications.
The idea that Mesopotamia possessed a ‘primitive democracy’ was ﬁrstadvanced in the 1940s by Thorkild Jacobsen, the Danish historian andAssyriologist.51 Today, scholars in that ﬁeld have extended his idea evenfurther. District councils and assemblies of elders – representing theinterests of urban publics – were not just a feature of the earliestMesopotamian cities, as Jacobsen thought; there is evidence for them in alllater periods of Mesopotamian history too, right down to the time of theAssyrian, Babylonian and Persian Empires, whose memory lived onthrough biblical scripture.
Popular councils and citizen assemblies (Sumerian: ukkin; Akkadian:puhrum) were stable features of government, not just in Mesopotamiancities, but also their colonial offshoots (like the Old Assyrian karum of Kanesh, in Anatolia), and in the urban societies of neighbouring peoples such as the Hittites, Phoenicians, Philistines and Israelites.52 In fact, it isalmost impossible to ﬁnd a city anywhere in the ancient Near East that didnot have some equivalent to a popular assembly – or often severalassemblies (for instance, different ones representing the interests of ‘theyoung’ and ‘the old’). This was the case even in areas such as the Syriansteppe and northern Mesopotamia, where traditions of monarchy randeep.53 Still, we know very little about how these assemblies functioned,their composition, or often even where they met.54 Likely as not, anancient Greek observer might have described some of them as democratic,others oligarchic, still others as a mix of democratic, oligarchic andmonarchic principles. But for the most part, experts can only guess.
Some of the clearest evidence comes from between the ninth and seventh centuries BC. Assyrian emperors like Sennacherib and Ashurbanipal havebeen famous since biblical times for their brutality, creating monuments thatboasted of the bloody vengeance they carried out against rebels. But whendealing with loyal subjects they were strikingly hands-off, often grantingnear-total autonomy to citizen bodies that made decisions collectively.55 
We know this because governors stationed far from the Assyrian court, insouthern Mesopotamia’s major cities – Babylon, Nippur, Uruk, Ur, and soon – sent letters to their overlords. Many of these were letters recovered byarchaeologists during the excavation of royal archives at the ancientimperial capital of Nineveh. In them, city governors relay information to theAssyrian court about decisions made by civic councils. We learn the ‘will ofthe people’ on matters ranging from foreign policy to the election ofgovernors; also, that citizen bodies sometimes took matters into their ownhands, raising soldiers or taxes to support civic projects, and playing theiroverlords off against each other.
Neighbourhood wards (Akkadian: b.btum, after the word for ‘gate’)were active in local administration, and sometimes appear to havereplicated certain aspects of village or tribal governance in an urbansetting.56 Murder trials, divorce and property disputes seem to have beenmostly in the hands of town councils. Texts found at Nippur give unusualdetails about the composition of one such assembly, summoned to act as ajury for a homicide case. Among those sitting we ﬁnd one bird catcher, onepotter, two gardeners and a soldier in the service of a temple. TheTrinidadian intellectual C. L. R. James once said of ﬁfth-century Athensthat ‘every cook can govern’. In Mesopotamia, or at least in many parts of 
it, it seems this was literally true: being a manual labourer did not excludeone from direct participation in law and politics.57 

Participatory government in ancient Mesopotamian cities was organizedat multiple levels, from wards – sometimes deﬁned on ethnic lines or interms of professional afﬁliations – up to larger urban districts, andultimately the city as a whole. The interests of individual citizens might berepresented at every tier, but the surviving written evidence containsfrustratingly few details about how this system of urban governmentworked in practice. Historians attribute this lack of information to the keyrole of assemblies, operating at various scales, and conducting theirdeliberations (about local property disputes, divorce and inheritance cases,accusations of theft or murder, and so on) in ways that were largelyindependent of central government and did not require its writtenauthorization.58 

Archaeologists ﬁnd themselves in general agreement with the historians,although one might reasonably ask how archaeology can shed independentlight on such political matters. One answer comes from the site ofMashkan-shapir, an important centre under the kings of Larsa, around 2000 BC. As with most Mesopotamian cities, the urban landscape of Mashkan.shapir was dominated by its main temple – in this case, the sanctuary ofNergal, god of the underworld – raised up high on a ziggurat platform; butintensive archaeological survey of the city’s harbour, gateways andresidential districts revealed a strikingly even distribution of wealth, craftproduction and administrative tools across the ﬁve main districts, with noobvious centre of commercial or political power.59 In terms of day-to-dayaffairs, city dwellers (even under monarchies) largely governed themselves,presumably much as they had before kings appeared on the scene to beginwith. 
Things could work the other way round. Sometimes, the arrival of anauthoritarian ruler from outside the city sent urban life into reverse. Suchwas the case with the Amorite Dynasty of the Lims – Yaggid-Lim,Yahudun-Lim and Zimri-Lim – which conquered much of the SyrianEuphrates around the same time Mashkan-shapir was thriving far to thesouth. The Lims decided to set up their centre of operations in the ancientcity called Mari (modern Tell Hariri, on the Syrian Euphrates), andoccupied government buildings in its heart. Their arrival seems to haveprecipitated a mass exodus of Mari’s urban population, who left to join up with smaller townships or tent-dwelling herders scattered across the Syriansteppe. Before the sack of Mari by Hammurabi of Babylon in 1761 BC, thelast ‘city’ of the Amorite kings comprised little more than the royalresidence, harem, attached temples and a handful of other ofﬁcialbuildings.60 

Written correspondence of this period offers direct evidence of antipathybetween arriviste monarchy of this kind and the established power of urbanassemblies. Letters to Zimri-Lim from Terru – lord of the ancient Hurrian capital of Urkesh (modern Tell Mozan) – convey his impotence in the faceof the city’s councils and assemblies. On one occasion, Terru tells Zimri-Lim: ‘Because I am submitted to my lord’s pleasure, the inhabitants of mytown despise me, and two and three times I have snatched my head backfrom death by their hand.’ To which the Mari king responds: ‘I did notrealize that the inhabitants of your town despised you on account of me.You belong to me even if the town of Urkesh belongs to someone else.’ Allthis came to a head when Terru confessed he had to ﬂee from public opinion(‘the mouth of Urkesh’), taking refuge in a nearby town.61 

So, far from needing rulers to manage urban life, it seems mostMesopotamian urbanites were organized into autonomous self-governingunits, which might react to offensive overlords either by driving them out orby abandoning the city entirely. None of this necessarily answers thequestion, ‘what was the nature of government in Mesopotamian citiesbefore the appearance of kingship?’ (though it’s certainly suggestive).Instead, the answers depend to a slightly alarming degree on discoveriesfrom a single site: the city of Uruk – modern Warka, biblical Erech – whoselater mythology inspired Jacobsen’s original search for ‘primitivedemocracy’.62 

IN WHICH WE DESCRIBE HOW (WRITTEN) HISTORY, ANDPROBABLY (ORAL) EPIC TOO, BEGAN: WITH BIG COUNCILSIN THE CITIES, AND SMALL KINGDOMS IN THE HILLS 
At 3300 BC, Uruk was a city of around 200 hectares, dwarﬁng herneighbours on the southern Mesopotamian ﬂoodplain. Estimates of Uruk’spopulation at this time range widely, between 20,000 and 50,000. The ﬁrstresidential quarters are built over by later urban settlement, which continueddown to the time of Alexander the Great in the fourth century BC.63 

Cuneiform script may well have been invented at Uruk, around 3300 BC,and we can see its early stages of development in numerical tablets andother forms of administrative notation. Bookkeeping in the city’s templeswas writing’s main function at that point.64 Thousands of years later, it wasalso in the temples of Uruk that cuneiform script ﬁnally passed intoobsolescence, by which time it had been elaborated to record, among otherthings, the world’s earliest written literature and law codes.
What do we know about the original city of Uruk? By the late fourthmillennium BC it had a high acropolis, much of which was taken up by theraised public district called Eanna, ‘House of Heaven’, dedicated to theGoddess Inanna. On its summit stood nine monumental buildings, of whichonly the foundations of imported limestone survive, together with bits ofstairwells and fragments of columned halls decorated with coloured mosaic.The roofs of these broad civic structures must originally have beenconstructed of exotic timbers, brought by river barge from the ‘CedarForest’ of Syria, which form the backdrop to the Mesopotamian Epic ofGilgamesh.
For the urban historian, Uruk remains something of a strange fruit. A bitlike a Ukrainian mega-site in reverse, its oldest known architectural layoutis all core with no surrounding ﬂesh, since we know almost nothing of theresidential districts beyond the Eanna precinct, which were ignored by earlyexcavators at the site. In other words, we glimpse something of the city’spublic sector, but as yet we have no private sector against which to deﬁne it.Still, let’s press on with what we do know.
Most of these public buildings seem to have been great communalassembly halls, clearly modelled on the plan of ordinary households, butconstructed as houses of the gods.65 There was also a Great Court comprising an enormous sunken plaza, 165 feet across, entirely surroundedby two tiers of benches and equipped with water channels to feed trees andgardens, which offered much-needed shade for open-air gatherings. Thissort of arrangement – a series of magniﬁcent, open temples accompanied bya congenial space for public meetings – is exactly what one might expectwere Uruk to have been governed by a popular assembly; and, as Jacobsenemphasized, the Gilgamesh epic (which begins in Predynastic Uruk) doesspeak of such assemblies, including one reserved for the young men of thecity. 
To draw an obvious parallel: the Athenian agora in the time of Pericles(the ﬁfth century BC) was also full of public temples, but the actualdemocratic assemblies took place in an open space called the Pnyx, a lowhill equipped with seating for the Council of Five Hundred citizens,appointed – by sortition, with rotating membership – to run the everydayaffairs of the city (all other citizens were expected to stand). Meetings at thePnyx could involve anywhere between 6,000 and 12,000 people, groupscomprising free adult males drawn from perhaps 20 per cent of the city’stotal population. The Great Court at Uruk is considerably larger, and whilewe have little idea what the total population of Uruk was in, say, 3500 BC,it’s hard to imagine it was anywhere near that of classical Athens. Thissuggests a wider range of participation, which would make sense if womenwere not entirely excluded and if early Uruk did not, like later Athens,deﬁne some 30 per cent of its population as resident aliens with no votingrights, and up to 40 per cent as slaves.
Much of this remains speculative, but what’s clear is that in later periodsthings change. Around 3200 BC the original public buildings of the Eannasanctuary were razed and covered with debris, and its sacred landscaperedesigned around a series of gated courts and ziggurats. By 2900 BC, wehave evidence for local kings of rival city-states battling it out forsupremacy over Uruk, in response to which a ﬁve-and-a-half-milefortiﬁcation wall (whose building was later attributed to Gilgamesh) wentup around the city’s perimeter. Within a few centuries, city rulers weresetting themselves up as neighbours of the goddesses and the gods, buildingtheir own palatial houses on the doorstep to the House of Heaven andstamping their names into its sacred brickwork.66 

Once again, while evidence of democratic self-governance is always a bitambiguous (would anyone guess what was really going on in ﬁfth-centuryAthens, from archaeological evidence alone?), evidence for royal rule,when it appears, is entirely unmistakable. 
What Uruk is really famous for is writing. It is the ﬁrst city for which wehave extensive written records, and some of these documents do date backto the period before royal rule. Unfortunately, while they can be read, theyare also extremely difﬁcult to interpret.
Most are cuneiform tablets recovered from trash dumps dug into thefoundations of the acropolis, and they appear to provide only a very narrow window on to city life. The great majority are bureaucratic receipts,recording transactions of goods and services. There are also ‘school texts’which comprise sign-lists, copied out by scribes in training to familiarizethem with the standard administrative lexicon of the time. The historical value of the latter is unclear, because scribes may have had to learn to writeall kinds of cuneiform signs – which were executed by pressing a reedstylus into moist clay – that had little application in practice. Such learningmay well have been part of what was considered a proper literate training atthe time.67 

Still, the mere existence of a college of scribes administering complicatedrelations between people, animals and things shows us there was muchmore going on in the large ‘houses of the gods’ than just ritual gatherings.There were goods and industries to be administered, and a body of citizenswho developed pedagogical techniques that quickly became so essential tothis particular form of urban life that they remain with us to this day. To geta sense of how pervasive some of these innovations were, consider that justabout anyone reading this book is likely to have ﬁrst learned to read inclassrooms, sitting in rows opposite a teacher, who follows a standardcurriculum. This rather stern way of learning was itself a Sumerianinvention, one now to be found in virtually every corner of our world.68 

So what do we know about these houses of the gods? For one thing, it isclear that in many ways they resembled factories more than churches. Eventhe earliest for which there is evidence had considerable amounts of human labour at their disposal, along with workshops and stockpiles of rawmaterials. Some details of the way these Sumerian temples organizedthemselves are still with us, including the quantiﬁcation of human labourinto standard workloads and units of time. Sumerian ofﬁcials counted all sorts of things – including days, months and years – using a sexagesimal(base-60) system from which ultimately derives (via many and variedpathways of transmission) our own system of time-reckoning.69 In their bookkeeping records we ﬁnd the ancient seedbeds of modern industrialism,ﬁnance and bureaucracy.
It is often hard to determine exactly who these temple labourers were, oreven what sort of people were being organized in this way, allotted mealsand having their outputs inventoried – were they permanently attached tothe temple, or just ordinary citizens fulﬁlling their annual corvée duty? –but the presence of children in the lists suggests at least some may have lived there. If so, then this was most likely because they had nowhere elseto go. If later Sumerian temples are anything to go by, this workforce willhave comprised a whole assortment of the urban needy: widows, orphansand others rendered vulnerable by debt, crime, conﬂict, poverty, disease ordisability, who found in the temple a place of refuge and support.70 

For the time being, though, let us just emphasize the remarkable numberof industries that developed in these temple workshops, as documented inthe cuneiform accounts. Among them we ﬁnd the ﬁrst large-scale dairy andwool production; also the manufacture of leavened bread, beer and wine,including facilities for standardized packaging. Some eighty varieties of ﬁsh
– fresh- and saltwater – appear in the administrative accounts along withtheir associated oil and food products, preserved and stored in templerepositories. From this we can deduce that a primary economic function ofthis temple sector was to co-ordinate labour at key times of year, and toprovide quality control for processed goods that differed from those madein ordinary households.71 

This particular kind of work, unlike the maintenance of irrigation dykesand building of roads and embankments, was routinely carried out undercentral administrative control. In other words, in the early phases ofMesopotamian urban life, what we would ordinarily imagine as the statesector (e.g. public works, international relations) was managed largely bylocal or city-wide assemblies; while top-down bureaucratic procedures werelimited to what we would now think of as the economic or commoditysphere.72 

Of course, Uruk’s inhabitants didn’t have an explicit concept of ‘theeconomy’ – no one did until very recent times. For Sumerians, the ultimatepurpose of all these factories and workshops was to provide the gods andgoddesses of the city with an illustrious residence where they would receiveofferings of food, ﬁne clothing and care, which also meant servicing theircult and organizing their festivals. The latter activity was probably depictedon the Uruk Vase, one of the few surviving examples of narrative art fromthis early period, whose carved decoration shows a number of identicalnude males parading behind one larger male ﬁgure to the temple precinct ofthe Goddess Inanna with their yield of ﬁeld, orchard and ﬂock.73 

It’s not entirely clear who the larger, leading male ﬁgure – or ‘Uruk man’,as he’s sometimes called in the literature – is supposed to be. According tothe much later story of Gilgamesh, which is set in Uruk, one of the leaders of the youth assembly did manage to catapult himself into the position oflugal, or king – but if anything like this happened it left no trace in thewritten records of the fourth millennium BC, since lists of Uruk ofﬁceholders have been found, dating to that time, and lugal is not among them.(The term only shows up much later, around 2600 BC, at a time when thereare also palaces and other clear signs of royalty.) There is no reason to thinkthat monarchy – ceremonial or otherwise – played any signiﬁcant role in theearliest cities of southern Mesopotamia. Quite the opposite, in fact.74 

Yet it’s also clear that early inscriptions prise open only a very narrowwindow on urban life. We know something about the mass production ofwoollen garments and other commodities in temples; we can also infer that
– somehow or other – these woollens and other temple manufactures werebeing traded for wood, metal and precious stone that were not available inthe river valleys, but abounded in the surrounding high country. We knowlittle about how this trade was organized in its earliest days, but we doknow from archaeological evidence that Uruk was establishing colonies,tiny versions of itself, at many strategic points along the trade routes. Urukcolonies appear to have been both commercial outposts and religiouscentres, and traces of them are found as far north as the Taurus Mountainsand as far east as the Iranian Zagros.75 

‘Uruk expansion’, as it is called in the archaeological literature, ispuzzling. There’s no real evidence of violent conquest, no weapons orfortiﬁcations, yet at the same time there seems to have been an effort totransform – in effect, to colonize – the lives of nearby peoples, todisseminate the new habits of urban life. In this, the emissaries of Urukseem to have proceeded with an almost missionary zeal. Temples wereestablished, and with them new sorts of clothing, new dairy products, winesand woollens were disseminated to local populations. While these productsmight not have been entirely novel, what the temples introduced was theprinciple of standardization: urban temple-factories were literally outputtingproducts in uniform packages, with the houses of the gods guaranteeingpurity and quality control.76 

The entire process was, in a sense, colonial, and it did not go unopposed.As it turns out, we cannot really understand the rise of what we have cometo call ‘the state’ – and speciﬁcally of aristocracies and monarchies – exceptin the larger context of that counter-reaction. 
Perhaps the most revealing site, in this respect, is called Arslantepe – the‘Hill of the Lion’, in the Malatya Plain of eastern Turkey. Around the sametime Uruk was becoming a large city, Arslantepe was coming into its ownas a regional centre of some signiﬁcance, where the upper reaches of theEuphrates arc towards the Anti-Taurus Mountains, with their rich sources ofmetal and timber. The site may have started life as some kind of seasonaltrade fair; at nearly 3,300 feet above sea level, it was likely snowed in overthe winter months. Even at its peak it was never larger than ﬁve hectares,and there were probably never more than a few hundred people actuallyliving on the spot. Within those ﬁve hectares, however, archaeologists haveunearthed evidence for a remarkable sequence of political developments.77 

The story of Arslantepe begins around 3300 BC, when a temple was builton the site. This temple resembled those of Uruk and her colonies, withstorage areas for food and carefully arranged archives of administrativeseals, just as in any temple of the Mesopotamian ﬂoodplain. But within afew generations the temple was dismantled, and in its place was built amassive private structure enclosing a grand audience chamber and livingquarters, as well as storage areas, including an armoury. An assemblage ofswords and spearheads – ﬁnely crafted of arsenic-rich copper and quiteunlike anything found in public buildings of the lowlands at this time –signals not only control over, but a celebration of the means to enactviolence: a new aesthetics of personal combat and killing. The excavatorshave labelled this building the world’s ‘earliest known palace’.
From 3100 BC, across the hilly country of what’s now eastern Turkey, andthen in other places on the edge of urban civilization, we see evidence forthe rise of a warrior aristocracy, heavily armed with metal spears andswords, living in what appear to be hill forts or small palaces. All traces ofbureaucracy disappear. In their place we ﬁnd not just aristocratichouseholds – reminiscent of Beowulf’s mead hall, or indeed the PaciﬁcNorthwest Coast in the nineteenth century – but for the ﬁrst time also tombsof men who, in life, were clearly considered heroic individuals of some sort,accompanied to the afterlife by prodigious quantities of metal weaponry,treasures, elaborate textiles and drinking gear.78 

Everything about these tombs and their makers, living on the frontiers ofurban life, bespeaks a spirit of extravagance. Copious amounts of ﬁne food,drink and personal jewellery were deposited. There are signs that suchfunerals could spiral into spectacles of competitive one-upmanship, as what must have been priceless trophies, heirlooms and prizes of unparalleledmagniﬁcence were offered up or even intentionally destroyed; some, too,are accompanied by subsidiary burials of those apparently slaughtered atthe graveside as offerings.79 Unlike the isolated ‘princes’ and ‘princesses’of the Ice Age, there are whole cemeteries full of such burials – for exampleat Ba.ur Höyük, on the way to Lake Van, while at Arslantepe we seeexactly the kind of physical infrastructure (forts, storehouses) we mightexpect from a society dominated by some sort of warrior aristocracy.
Here we have the very beginnings of an aristocratic ethos with a longafterlife and some wide ramiﬁcations in the history of Eurasia (somethingwe touched on earlier, when alluding to Herodotus’ account of theScythians, and Ibn Fadlan’s later observations on the ‘barbarian’ Germanictribes of the Volga). We are witnessing the ﬁrst known emergence of whatHector Munro Chadwick famously called ‘heroic societies’ and, moreover,these societies all seem to have emerged just where his analysis tells us toexpect them: on the margins of bureaucratically ordered cities.
Writing in the 1920s, Chadwick – Professor of Anglo-Saxon atCambridge, at much the same time J. R. R. Tolkien held that post at Oxford
– was initially concerned with why great traditions of epic poetry (Nordicsagas, the works of Homer, the Ramayana) always seemed to emergeamong people in contact with and often employed by the urban civilizationsof their day, but who ultimately rejected the values of those samecivilizations. For a long time, his notion of ‘heroic societies’ fell into acertain disfavour: there was a widespread assumption that such societies didnot really exist but were, like the society represented in Homer’s Iliad,retroactively reconstructed in epic literature.
But as archaeologists have more recently discovered, there is a very realpattern of heroic burials, indicating in turn an emerging cultural emphasison feasting, drinking, the beauty and fame of the individual male warrior.80 
And it appears time and again around the fringes of urban life, often instrikingly similar forms, over the course of the Eurasian Bronze Age. Insearching for the common features of such ‘heroic societies’, we can ﬁnd afairly consistent list in precisely the traditions of epic poetry that Chadwickcompared (in each region, the ﬁrst written versions being much later in datethan the heroic burials themselves, but shedding light on earlier customs).It’s a list which applies just as well, in most of its features, to the potlatch societies of the Northwest Coast or, for that matter, the M.ori of NewZealand. 
All these cultures were aristocracies, without any centralized authority orprinciple of sovereignty (or, maybe, some largely symbolic, formal one).Instead of a single centre, we ﬁnd numerous heroic ﬁgures competingﬁercely with one another for retainers and slaves. ‘Politics’, in suchsocieties, was composed of a history of personal debts of loyalty orvengeance between heroic individuals; all, moreover, focus on game-likecontests as the primary business of ritual, indeed political, life.81 Often,massive amounts of loot or wealth were squandered, sacriﬁced or givenaway in such theatrical performances. Moreover, all such groups explicitlyresisted certain features of nearby urban civilizations: above all, writing, forwhich they tended to substitute poets or priests who engaged in rotememorization or elaborate techniques of oral composition. Inside their ownsocieties, at least, they also rejected commerce. Hence standardizedcurrency, either in physical or credit forms, tended to be eschewed, with thefocus instead on unique material treasures.
It goes without saying that we cannot possibly hope to trace all thesevarious tendencies back into periods for which no written testimony exists.But it is equally clear that, insofar as modern archaeology allows us toidentify an ultimate origin for ‘heroic societies’ of this sort, it is to be foundprecisely on the spatial and cultural margins of the world’s ﬁrst great urbanexpansion (indeed, some of the earliest aristocratic tombs in the Turkishhighlands were dug directly into the ruins of abandoned Uruk colonies).82 
Aristocracies, perhaps monarchy itself, ﬁrst emerged in opposition to theegalitarian cities of the Mesopotamian plains, for which they likely hadmuch the same mixed but ultimately hostile and murderous feelings asAlaric the Goth would later have towards Rome and everything it stood for,Genghis Khan towards Samarkand or Merv, or Timur towards Delhi. 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER WHETHER THE INDUS CIVILIZATION WAS AN EXAMPLE OF CASTE BEFORE KINGSHIP 
Fast-forward now 1,000 years from the Uruk expansion to around 2600 BC. On the banks of the Indus River, in what is today the Pakistani province ofSindh, a city was founded on virgin soil: Mohenjo-daro. It remained there 
for 700 years.83 The city is considered the greatest expression of a newform of society that ﬂourished in the valley of the Indus at the time; a formof society which archaeologists have come to know simply as the ‘Indus’ or‘Harappan’ civilization. It was South Asia’s ﬁrst urban culture. Here wewill ﬁnd further evidence that Bronze Age cities – the world’s ﬁrst large-scale, planned human settlements – could emerge in the absence of rulingclasses and managerial elites; but those of the Indus valley also presentsome uniquely puzzling features, which archaeologists have debated formore than a century.84 Let’s introduce both the problem and its key locus –the site of Mohenjo-daro – in a little more detail.
On ﬁrst inspection, Mohenjo-daro bears out its reputation as the mostcompletely preserved city of the Bronze Age world. There’s somethingstaggering about it all: a brazen modernity, which was not lost on the ﬁrstexcavators of the site, who didn’t hesitate to designate certain areas ‘highstreets’, ‘police barracks’ and so on (though much of this initialinterpretation, as it turned out, was fantasy). Most of the city consists of thebrick-built houses of the Lower Town, with its grid-like arrangement ofstreets, long boulevards and sophisticated drainage and sanitation systems(terracotta sewage pipes, private and public toilets and bathrooms wereubiquitous). Above these surprisingly comfortable arrangements loomed theUpper Citadel, a raised civic centre, also known (for reasons we’ll explain)as the Mound of the Great Bath. Though both parts of the city stood onmassive artiﬁcial foundations of heaped earth, lifting them above theﬂoodplain, the Upper Citadel was also encased in a wall of baked bricksmade to standard dimensions which extended all the way round it, affordingfurther protection when the Indus broke its banks.85 

In the wider ambit of Indus civilization, there is only one rival toMohenjo-daro: the site of Harappa (whence the alternative term ‘Harappancivilization’). Of similar magnitude, it lies about 370 miles upstream on theRavi River, a tributary of the Indus. Many other sites of the same date andcultural family exist, ranging from large towns to hamlets. They extendover most of the area of modern-day Pakistan, and well beyond theﬂoodplain of the Indus, into northern India. For instance, perched on anisland amid the salt ﬂats of the Great Rann of Kutch lie the striking remainsof Dholavira, a town equipped with over ﬁfteen brick-built reservoirs tocapture rainwater and run-off from local streams. The Indus civilization hadcolonial outposts as far as the Oxus River in northern Afghanistan, where the site of Shortugai presents a miniature replica of its urban mother-culture: ideally placed to tap the rich mineral sources of the Central Asianhighlands (lapis, tin and other gemstones and metals). Such materials wereprized by lowland artisans and their commercial partners as far away asIran, Arabia and Mesopotamia. At Lothal, on Gujarat’s Gulf of Khambhat,lie remains of a well-appointed port town facing the Arabian Sea,presumably built by Indus engineers to service maritime trade.86 

The Indus civilization had its own script, which appeared and vanishedtogether with its cities. It has not been deciphered. What survives to us aremainly short captions, stamped or incised on storage jars, copper tools andthe remnants of a lonely piece of street signage from Dholavira. Shortinscriptions also feature on tiny stone amulets, captioning pictorial vignettesor miniature animal ﬁgures, carved with striking precision. Most of theseare realistic depictions of water buffalo, elephant, rhinoceros, tiger andother local fauna, but they also include fantastic beasts, most oftenunicorns. Debate surrounds the amulets’ function: were they worn aspersonal identiﬁers, for passage through the city’s gated quarters and walledcompounds, or perhaps to gain entry to ceremonial occasions? Or were theyused for administration, to impress identifying signs on commoditiespassing among unknown parties: a Bronze Age origin of product-branding?Could they be all of these things?87 

Aside from our inability to make sense of the Indus script, there are manypuzzling aspects of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro. Both were excavated in theearly twentieth century, when archaeology was a large-scale and broad-brush affair, with sometimes thousands of workers digging simultaneously.Rapid work on this scale produced striking spatial exposures of street plans,residential neighbourhoods and entire ceremonial precincts. But it largelyneglected to chart the site’s development over time, a process that can onlybe disentangled with more careful methods. For instance, early excavatorsrecorded just the baked-brick foundations of buildings. The superstructureswere of softer mud-brick, often missed or unwittingly destroyed in thecourse of rapid digging; while the upper storeys of large civic structureswere originally of ﬁne timber, rotted or removed for reuse in antiquity.What seems in plan to be a single phase of urban construction is, in reality,a false composite made up of different elements from various periods of thecity’s history – a city inhabited for over 500 years.88 

All of which leaves us with plenty of known unknowns, including thecity’s size or population (recent estimates suggest up to 40,000 residents,but really we can only guess).89 It’s not even clear where to draw the cityboundaries. Some scholars include only the immediately visible areas of theplanned Lower Town and the Upper Citadel as part of the city proper,yielding a total area of 100 hectares. Others note scattered evidence for thecity’s extension over a far greater area, maybe three times this size – we’dhave to call them ‘Lower, Lower Towns’ – long since submerged byﬂoodplain soils: a poignant illustration of that conspiracy between natureand culture which so often makes us forget that shanty dwellers even exist.
But it’s this last point that leads us in more promising directions. Despiteall its problems, Mohenjo-daro and its sister sites in the Punjab do offersome insights into the nature of civic life in the ﬁrst cities of South Asia,and into the wider question that we posed at the start of this chapter: is therea causal relationship between scale and inequality in human societies?
Let’s consider, for a moment, what archaeology tells us about wealthdistribution at Mohenjo-daro. Contrary to what we might expect, there is noconcentration of material wealth on the Upper Citadel. Quite the opposite,in fact. Metals, gemstones and worked shell – for example – were widelyavailable to households of the Lower Town; archaeologists have recoveredsuch goods from caches beneath house ﬂoors, and bundles of them arescattered over every quarter of the site.90 The same goes for little terracottaﬁgures of people wearing bangles, diadems and other ﬂashy personaladornment. Not so the Upper Citadel.
Writing, and also standard weights and measures, were also widelydistributed across the Lower Town; so too evidence for craft occupationsand industries from metalworking and potting to the manufacture of beads.All ﬂourished down there, in the Lower Town, but are absent from the city’sUpper Citadel, where the main civic structures stood.91 Objects made forpersonal display had little place, it seems, in the most elevated quarters ofthe city. Instead, what deﬁnes the Upper Citadel are buildings like the GreatBath – a large sunken pool measuring roughly forty feet long and over sixfeet deep, lined with carefully executed brickwork, sealed with plaster andbitumen and entered on either side via steps with timber treads – allconstructed to the ﬁnest architectural standards, yet unmarked bymonuments dedicated to particular rulers, or indeed any other signs ofpersonal aggrandizement. 
Because of its lack of royal sculpture, or indeed other forms ofmonumental depiction, the Indus valley has been termed a ‘facelesscivilization’.92 At Mohenjo-daro, it seems, the focus of civic life was not apalace or cenotaph, but a public facility for purifying the body. Brick-madebathing ﬂoors and platforms also were a standard ﬁxture in most dwellingsof the Lower Town. Citizens seem to have been familiar with very speciﬁcnotions of cleanliness, with daily ablutions apparently forming part of theirdomestic routine. The Great Bath was, at one level, an outsized version ofthese residential washing facilities. On another level, though, life on theUpper Citadel seems to negate that of the Lower Town.
So long as the Great Bath was in use – and it was for some centuries – weﬁnd no evidence of industrial activities nearby. The narrowing lanes on theacropolis effectively prevented the use of ox-drawn carts and similarcommercial trafﬁc. Here, it was the Bath itself – and the act of bathing –that became the focus of social life and labour. Barracks and storerooms adjacent to the Bath housed a staff (whether in attached or rotating service,we cannot know) and their essential supplies. The Upper Citadel was aspecial sort of ‘city within the city’, in which ordinary principles ofhousehold organization went into reverse.93 

All this is redolent of the inequality of the caste system, with itshierarchical division of social functions, organized on an ascending scale ofpurity.94 But the earliest recorded reference to caste in South Asia comes only 1,000 years later, in the Rig Veda – an anthology of sacriﬁcial hymns,ﬁrst committed to writing around 1200 BC. The system, as described in laterSanskrit epics, consisted of four hereditary ranks or varnas: priests(brahmins), warriors or nobles (kshatriyas), farmers and traders (vaishyas)and labourers (shudras); and also those so lowly as to be excluded from the varnas entirely. The very top ranks belong to world-renouncers, whoseabstention from trappings of personal status raises them to a higher spiritualplane. Commerce, industry and status rivalries may all thrive, but thewealth, power or prosperity being fought over is always seen as of lesservalue – in the great scheme of things – than the purity of priestly caste.
The varna system is about as ‘unequal’ as any social system can possiblybe, yet where one ranks within it has less to do with how many materialgoods one can pile up or lay claim to than with one’s relation to certain(polluting) substances – physical dirt and waste, but also bodily matterlinked to birth, death and menstruation – and the people who handle them. 
All this creates serious problems for any contemporary scholar seeking toapply Gini coefﬁcients or any other property-based measure of ‘inequality’to the society in question. On the other hand, and despite the great gaps intime between our sources, it might allow us to make sense of some ofMohenjo-daro’s otherwise puzzling features, such as the fact that thoseresidential buildings most closely resembling palaces are not located on theUpper Citadel but crammed into the streets of the Lower Town – that bitcloser to the mud, sewage pipes and paddy ﬁelds, where such jostling forworldly status seems to have properly belonged.95 

Clearly, we can’t just project the social world evoked in Sanskritliterature indiscriminately on to the much earlier Indus civilization. If theﬁrst South Asian cities were indeed organized on caste-like principles, thenwe would immediately have to acknowledge a major difference from thesystem of ranks described over a millennium later in Sanskrit texts, wheresecond-highest status (just below brahmins) is reserved for the warrior casteknown as kshatriyas. In the Bronze Age Indus valley there is no evidence ofanything like a kshatriya class of warrior-nobles, nor of the kind ofaggrandizing behaviour associated with such groups in later epic tales suchas the Mahabharata or Ramayana. Even the largest cities, like Harappa andMohenjo-daro, yield no evidence of spectacular sacriﬁces or feasts, nopictorial narratives of military prowess or celebrations of famous deeds, nosign of tournaments in which anyone vied over titles and treasures, noaristocratic burials. And if such things were going on in the Indus cities atthe time, there would be ways to know.
Indus civilization wasn’t some kind of commercial or spiritual arcadia;nor was it an entirely peaceful society.96 But neither does it contain anyevidence for charismatic authority ﬁgures: war leaders, lawgivers and thelike. A small, cloaked sculpture made of yellow limestone from Mohenjo.daro, known in the literature as the ‘priest-king’, is often presented as such.But, in fact, there’s no particular reason to believe the ﬁgure really is apriest-king or an authority ﬁgure of any sort. It’s simply a limestone imageof an urbane Bronze Age man with a beard. The fact that past generationsof scholars have insisted on referring to him as ‘priest-king’ is testimonymore to their own assumptions about what they think must have beenhappening in early Asian cities than anything the evidence implies.
Over time, experts have largely come to agree that there’s no evidencefor priest-kings, warrior nobility, or anything like what we would recognize as a ‘state’ in the urban civilization of the Indus valley. Can we speak, then,of ‘egalitarian cities’ here as well, and if so, in what sense? If the UpperCitadel at Mohenjo-daro really was dominated by some sort of asceticorder, literally ‘higher’ than everyone else, and the area around the citadelby wealthy merchants, then there was a clear hierarchy between groups. Yetthis doesn’t necessarily mean that the groups themselves were hierarchicalin their internal organization, or that ascetics and merchants had a greatersay than anyone else when it came to matters of day-to-day governance.
Now, you might at this point be objecting: ‘well, yes, technically thatmay be true, but honestly, what’s the chance that they weren’t hierarchical,or that the pure or the wealthy did not have greater say in running the city’saffairs?’ In fact, it seems very difﬁcult for most of us even to imagine howself-conscious egalitarianism on a large scale would work. But this againsimply serves to demonstrate how automatically we have come to accept anevolutionary narrative in which authoritarian rule is somehow the naturaloutcome whenever a large enough group of people are brought together(and, by implication, that something called ‘democracy’ emerges only muchlater, as a conceptual breakthrough – and most likely just once, in ancientGreece).
Scholars tend to demand clear and irrefutable evidence for the existence of democratic institutions of any sort in the distant past. It’s striking howthey never demand comparably rigorous proof for top-down structures ofauthority. These latter are usually treated as a default mode of history: thekind of social structures you would simply expect to see in the absence ofevidence for anything else.97 We could speculate about where this habit ofthought comes from, but it wouldn’t help us to decide if the everydaygovernance of early Indus cities could have proceeded on egalitarian lines,alongside the existence of ascetic social orders. It is more useful, wesuggest, to level the interpretive playing ﬁeld by asking if there are cases ofsuch things happening in later, better-documented periods of South Asianhistory.
In fact, such cases are not difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Consider the social milieufrom which Buddhist monasteries, or sangha, arose. The word sangha was actually ﬁrst used for the popular assemblies that governed many SouthAsian cities in the Buddha’s lifetime – roughly the ﬁfth century BC – and early Buddhist texts insist that the Buddha was himself inspired by theexample of these republics, and in particular the importance they accorded to convening full and frequent public assemblies. Early Buddhist sanghaswere meticulous in their demands for all monks to gather together in orderto reach unanimous decisions on matters of general concern, resorting tomajority vote only when consensus broke down.98 All this remains true of sangha to this day. Over the course of time, Buddhist monasteries havevaried a great deal in governance – many have been extremely hierarchicalin practice. But the important thing here is that even 2,000 years ago it wasnot considered in any way unusual for members of ascetic orders to makedecisions in much the same way as, for example, contemporary anti-authoritarian activists do in Europe or Latin America (by consensusprocess, with a fallback on majority vote); that these forms of governancewere based on an ideal of equality; and that there were entire citiesgoverned in what was seen to be exactly the same way.99 

We might go further still and ask: are there any known examples ofsocieties with formal caste hierarchies, in which practical governancenonetheless takes place on egalitarian lines? It may seem paradoxical butthe answer, again, is yes: there is plenty of evidence for such arrangements,some of which continue to this day. Perhaps best documented is the seka system on the island of Bali, whose population adopted Hinduism in theMiddle Ages. Balinese are not only divided by caste: their society isconceived as a total hierarchy in which not just every group but everyindividual knows (or at least, should know) their exact position in relationto everyone else. In principle, then, there are no equals, and most Balinesewould argue that in the greater cosmic scheme of things, this must alwaysbe so. 
At the same time, however, practical affairs such as the management ofcommunities, temples and agricultural life are organized according to theseka system, in which everyone is expected to participate on equal termsand come to decisions by consensus. For instance, if a neighbourhoodassociation meets to discuss repairing the roofs of public buildings, or whatto serve for food during an upcoming dance contest, those who considerthemselves particularly high and mighty, offended by the prospect of havingto sit in a circle on the ground with lowly neighbours, may choose not toattend; but in that case they are obliged to pay ﬁnes for non-attendance –ﬁnes which are then used to pay for the feast or the repairs.100 We currentlyhave no way of knowing if such a system prevailed in the Indus valley over4,000 years ago. The example merely serves to underscore that there is no necessary correspondence between overarching concepts of social hierarchyand the practical mechanics of local governance.
The same is, incidentally, true of kingdoms and empires. One verycommon theory held that these tended to ﬁrst appear in river valleys,because agriculture there involved the maintenance of complex irrigationsystems, which in turn required some form of administrative co-ordinationand control. Bali again provides the perfect counter-example. For most ofits history Bali was divided into a series of kingdoms, endlessly squabblingover this or that. It is also famous as a rather small volcanic island which manages to support one of the densest populations on earth by a complexsystem of irrigated wet-rice agriculture. Yet the kingdoms seem to have hadno role whatsoever in the management of the irrigation system. This wasgoverned by a series of ‘water-temples’, through which the distribution ofwater was managed by an even more complex system of consensualdecision-making, according to egalitarian principles, by the farmersthemselves.101 

CONCERNING AN APPARENT CASE OF ‘URBAN REVOLUTION’ IN CHINESE PREHISTORY 
So far in this chapter we’ve looked at what happened when cities ﬁrstappeared in three distinct parts of Eurasia. In each case, we noted theabsence of monarchs or any evidence of a warrior elite, and thecorresponding likelihood that each had instead developed institutions ofcommunal self-governance. Within those broad parameters, each regionaltradition was very different. Contrasts between the expansion of Uruk andthe Ukrainian mega-sites illustrate this point with particular clarity. Bothappear to have developed an ethos of explicit egalitarianism – but it tookstrikingly different forms in each.
It is possible to express these differences at a purely formal level. A self-conscious ethos of egalitarianism, at any point in history, might take eitherof two diametrically opposing forms. We can insist that everyone is, orshould be, precisely the same (at least in the ways that we considerimportant); or alternatively, we can insist that everyone is so utterlydifferent from each other that there are simply no criteria for comparison(for example, we are all unique individuals, and so there is no basis upon which any one of us can be considered better than another). Real-lifeegalitarianism will normally tend to involve a bit of both.
Yet it could be argued that Mesopotamia – with its standardizedhousehold products, allocation of uniform payments to temple employees,and public assemblies – seems to have largely embraced the ﬁrst version.Ukrainian mega-sites, in which each household seems to have developed itsown unique artistic style and, presumably, idiosyncratic domestic rituals,embraced the second.102 The Indus valley appears – if our interpretation isbroadly correct – to represent yet a third possibility, where rigorous equalityin certain areas (even the bricks were all precisely the same size) wascomplemented by explicit hierarchy in others.
It’s important to stress that we are not arguing that the very ﬁrst cities toappear in any region of the world were invariably founded on egalitarianprinciples (in fact, we will shortly see a perfect counter-example). What weare saying is that archaeological evidence shows this to have been asurprisingly common pattern, which goes against conventional evolutionaryassumptions about the effects of scale on human society. In each of thecases we’ve considered so far – Ukrainian mega-sites, Uruk Mesopotamia,the Indus valley – a dramatic increase in the scale of organized humansettlement took place with no resulting concentration of wealth or power inthe hands of ruling elites. In short, archaeological research has shifted theburden of proof on to those theorists who claim causal connections betweenthe origins of cities and the rise of stratiﬁed states, and whose claims nowlook increasingly hollow. 
So far we’ve been providing what are effectively a series of snapshot viewsof cities that, in most cases, were occupied for centuries. It seems unlikelythat they did not have their own share of upheavals, transformations andconstitutional crises. In some cases we can be certain they did. At Mohenjo.daro, for instance, we know that roughly 200 years before the city’s demise,the Great Bath had already fallen into disrepair. Industrial facilities andordinary residences crept beyond the Lower Town, on to the Upper Citadel,and even the site of the Bath itself. Within the Lower Town, we now ﬁndbuildings of truly palatial dimensions with attached craft workshops.103 
This ‘other’ Mohenjo-daro existed for generations, and seems to represent aself-conscious project of transforming the city’s (by then centuries-old) hierarchy into something else – though archaeologists have yet to fathomquite what that other thing was supposed to be.
Like the Ukrainian cities, those of the Indus were eventually abandonedentirely, to be replaced by societies of much smaller scale where heroicaristocrats held sway. In Mesopotamian cities palaces eventually appear.Overall, one might be forgiven for thinking that history was progressinguniformly in an authoritarian direction. And in the very long run it was; atleast, by the time we have written histories, lords and kings and would-beworld emperors have popped up almost everywhere (though civicinstitutions and independent cities never entirely go away).104 Still, rushingto this conclusion would be unwise. Dramatic reversals have sometimes taken place in the other direction – for instance in China.
In China, archaeology has opened a yawning chasm between the birth ofcities and the appearance of the earliest named royal dynasty, the Shang.Since the early twentieth century discovery of inscribed oracle bones atAnyang in the north-central province of Henan, political history in Chinahas started with the Shang rulers, who came to power around 1200 BC.105 
Until quite recently, Shang civilization was thought to be a fusion of earlierurban (‘Erligang’ and ‘Erlitou’) and aristocratic or ‘nomadic’ elements, thelatter taking the form of bronze casting techniques, new types of weaponry,and horse-drawn chariots ﬁrst developed on the Inner Asian steppe, home toa series of powerful and highly mobile societies who played so much havocwith later Chinese history.106 

Before the Shang, nothing particularly interesting was supposed to havehappened – just a few decades ago, textbooks on early China simplypresented a long series of ‘Neolithic’ cultures receding into the distant past,deﬁned by technological trends in farming and stylistic changes in regionaltraditions of pottery and the design of ritual jades. The underlyingassumption was that these were pretty much the same as Neolithic farmerswere imagined to be anywhere else: living in villages, developingembryonic forms of social inequality, preparing the way for the sudden leapthat would bring the rise of cities and, with cities, the ﬁrst dynastic statesand empires. But we now know this is not what happened at all.
Today, archaeologists in China speak of a ‘Late Neolithic’ or ‘Longshan’period marked by what can be described, without equivocation, as cities.Already by 2600 BC we ﬁnd a spread of settlements surrounded by rammedearth walls across the entire valley of the Yellow River, from the coastal 
margins of Shandong to the mountains of southern Shanxi. They range insize from centres of more than 300 hectares to tiny principalities, little morethan villages but still fortiﬁed.107 The major demographic hubs lay faraway, on the lower reaches of the Yellow River to the east; also to the westof Henan, in the Fen River valley of Shanxi province; and in the Liangzhuculture of southern Jiangsu and northern Zhejiang.108 

Many of the largest Neolithic cities contain cemeteries, where individualburials hold tens or even hundreds of carved ritual jades. These may bebadges of ofﬁce, or perhaps a form of ritual currency: in ancestral rites, thestacking and combination of such jades, often in great number, alloweddifferences of rank to be measured along a common scale of value,spanning the living and the dead. Accommodating such ﬁnds in the annalsof written Chinese history proved an uncomfortable task, since we arespeaking of a long and apparently tumultuous epoch that just wasn’tsupposed to have happened.109 

The problem is not merely one of time, but also of space. Astonishingly,some of the most striking ‘Neolithic’ leaps towards urban life are nowknown to have taken place in the far north, on the frontier with Mongolia.From the perspective of later Chinese empires (and the historians whodescribed them), these regions were already halfway to ‘nomad-barbarian’and would eventually end up beyond the Great Wall. Nobody expectedarchaeologists to ﬁnd there, of all places, a 4,000-year-old city, extendingover 400 hectares, with a great stone wall enclosing palaces and a step-pyramid, lording it over a subservient rural hinterland nearly 1,000 yearspre-Shang.
The excavations at Shimao, on the Tuwei River, have revealed all this,along with abundant evidence for sophisticated crafts – including bone-working and bronze-casting – and warfare, including the mass killing andburial of captives, in around 2000 BC.110 Here we sense a much livelier political scene than was ever imagined in the annals of later courtlytradition. Some of it had a grisly aspect, including the decapitation ofcaptured foes, and the burial of some thousands of ancestral jade axes andsceptres in cracks between great stone blocks of the city wall, not to befound or seen again until the prying eyes of archaeologists uncovered themover four millennia later. The likely intention of all this was to disrupt,demoralize and delegitimize rival lineages (‘all in all, you’re just anotherjade in the wall’). 
At the site of Taosi – contemporary with Shimao, but located far to thesouth in the Jinnan basin – we ﬁnd a rather different story. Between 2300and 1800 BC, Taosi went through three phases of expansion. First, a fortiﬁedtown of sixty hectares arose on the ruins of a village, expandingsubsequently to a city of 300 hectares. In these early and middle periods,Taosi presents evidence for social stratiﬁcation almost as dramatic as whatwe see at Shimao, or indeed what we might expect of a later imperialChinese capital. There were massive enclosure walls, road systems andlarge, protected storage areas; also rigid segregation between commonerand elite quarters, with craft workshops and a calendrical monumentclustered around what was most likely some sort of palace.
Burials in the early town cemetery of Taosi fell into clearly distinct socialclasses. Commoner tombs were modest; elite tombs were full of hundredsof lacquered vessels, ceremonial jade axes and remains of extravagant porkfeasts. Then suddenly, around 2000 BC, everything seems to change. As theexcavator describes it: 
The city wall was razed ﬂat, and … the original functional divisionsdestroyed, resulting in a lack of spatial regulation. Commoners’residential areas now covered almost the entire site, even reachingbeyond the boundaries of the middle-period large city wall. The sizeof the city became even larger, reaching a total area of 300 hectares.In addition, the ritual area in the south was abandoned. The formerpalace area now included a poor-quality rammed-earth foundation ofabout 2,000 square metres, surrounded by trash pits used byrelatively low-status people. Stone tool workshops occupied whathad been the lower-level elite residential area. The city clearly hadlost its status as a capital, and was in a state of anarchy.111 

What’s more, there are clues that this was a conscious process oftransformation, most likely involving a signiﬁcant degree of violence.Commoner graves burst in on the elite cemetery, and in the palace district amass burial, with signs of torture and grotesque violations of the corpses,appears to be evidence for what the excavator describes as an ‘act ofpolitical retribution’.112 

Now, it is considered bad form to question an excavator’s ﬁrst-handjudgement about a site, but we cannot resist a couple of observations. First, the ostensible ‘state of anarchy’ (elsewhere described as ‘collapse andchaos’)113 lasted for a considerable period of time, between two and threecenturies. Second, the overall size of Taosi during the latter period actuallygrew from 280 to 300 hectares. This sounds a lot less like collapse than anage of widespread prosperity, following the abolition of a rigid classsystem. It suggests that after the destruction of the palace, people did notfall into a Hobbesian ‘war of all against all’ but simply got on with theirlives – presumably under what they considered a more equitable system oflocal self-governance.
Here, on the banks of the Fen River, we might conceivably be in thepresence of evidence for the world’s ﬁrst documented social revolution, orat least the ﬁrst in an urban setting. Other interpretations are no doubtpossible. But at the very least, the case of Taosi invites us to consider theworld’s earliest cities as places of self-conscious social experimentation,where very different visions of what a city could be like might clash –sometimes peacefully, sometimes erupting in bursts of extraordinaryviolence. Increasing the number of people living in one place may vastlyincrease the range of social possibilities, but in no sense does itpredetermine which of those possibilities will ultimately be realized.
As we’ll see in the next chapter, the history of central Mexico suggeststhat the kinds of revolution we’ve been talking about – urban revolutions ofthe political kind – may well be a lot more common in human history thanwe tend to think. Again, we may never be able fully to reconstruct theunwritten constitutions of the earliest cities to appear in various parts of theworld, or the reforms undergone in their ﬁrst centuries, but we can nolonger doubt that these existed. 

9 

Hiding in Plain Sight 
The indigenous origins of social housing and democracy in the Americas 
Sometime around AD 1150, a people called the Mexica migrated south froma place called Aztlán – its location is now unknown – to take up a newhome in the heart of the Valley of Mexico, which now bears their name.1 
There they were eventually to carve out an empire, the Aztec TripleAlliance,2 and build its capital at Tenochtitlan, an island-city in LakeTexcoco – one link in a chain of great lakes and lake-cities, and part of anurban landscape ringed by mountains. Lacking an urban tradition of theirown, the Mexica modelled the layout of Tenochtitlan on that of another citythey found, lying in ruins and virtually abandoned, in a valley about oneday’s journey distant. They called that other city Teotihuacan, the ‘Place ofGods’. 
It had been some time since anyone lived in Teotihuacan. By the twelfthcentury, when the Mexica arrived, nobody even seems to have rememberedthe city’s original name. Still, the new arrivals clearly found the city – withits two colossal pyramids set against the Cerro Gordo – both alien andalluring, and far too large simply to ignore. Their response, aside fromusing it as a model for their own great city, was to veil Teotihuacan in myth,and cage its standing remains in a dense forest of names and symbols. As aresult, we still see Teotihuacan largely through Aztec (Culhua-Mexica) eyes.3 

Written references to Teotihuacan from the time it was still inhabited comprise a few tantalizing inscriptions from far to the east in the Mayalowlands, which call it ‘the place of cattail reeds’, corresponding to theNahuatl word ‘Tollan’ and evoking a primordial, perfect city by the water.4 
Otherwise all we have are sixteenth-century transcriptions of chronicles, setdown in Spanish and Nahuatl, which describe Teotihuacan as a place full of mountain pools and primal voids, from which the planets sprang at thebeginning of time. The planets were followed by gods, and the gods by amysterious race of ﬁsh-men, whose world had to be destroyed to make wayfor our own. 
In historical terms, such sources are not very useful, especially since wehave no way of knowing if these myths were ever told in the city when itwas actually inhabited, or whether they were just invented by the Aztecs.Still, the legacy of those stories continues. It was the Aztecs, for instance,who made up the names ‘Pyramid of the Sun’, ‘Pyramid of the Moon’ and‘Way of the Dead’, which archaeologists and tourists alike use to this daywhen describing the city’s most visible monuments and the road that linksthem all.5 

For all their facility with astronomical calculation, the builders ofTenochtitlan either didn’t know or didn’t ﬁnd it important to know when,precisely, Teotihuacan had last been inhabited. Here, at least, archaeologyhas been able to ﬁll in the gaps. We know now that the city of Teotihuacanhad its heyday eight centuries before the coming of the Mexica, and morethan 1,000 years before the arrival of the Spanish. Its foundation dates toaround 100 BC, and its decline to around AD 600. We also know that, in thecourse of those centuries, Teotihuacan became a city of such grandeur andsophistication that it could easily be put on a par with Rome at the height ofits imperial power.
We don’t actually know if Teotihuacan was, like Rome, the centre of agreat empire, but even conservative estimates place its population at around100,0006 (perhaps as much as ﬁve times the likely population of Mohenjo.daro, Uruk or any of the other early Eurasian cities we discussed in the lastchapter). At its zenith, there were probably at least a million peopledistributed across the Valley of Mexico and surrounding lands, many ofwhom had only visited the great city once, or perhaps only knew someonewho had, but nonetheless considered Teotihuacan the most important placein the entire world. 
This much is broadly accepted by virtually every scholar and historian ofancient Mexico. More controversial is the question of what sort of cityTeotihuacan was, and how it was governed. Pose this question to aspecialist in the study of Mesoamerican history or archaeology (as we oftenhave done), and you’ll likely get the same reaction: a roll of the eyes and aresigned acknowledgement that there’s just something ‘weird’ about the place. Not merely because of its exceptional size, but because of itsstubborn refusal to conform to expectations of how an early Mesoamericancity should have functioned. 
At this point, the reader can probably guess what’s coming. All theevidence suggests that Teotihuacan had, at its height of its power, found away to govern itself without overlords – as did the much earlier cities ofprehistoric Ukraine, Uruk-period Mesopotamia and Bronze Age Pakistan.Yet it did so with a very different technological foundation, and on an evenlarger scale.
But ﬁrst some background. 
As we’ve seen, when kings appear in the historical record, they tend toleave unmistakeable traces. We can expect to ﬁnd palaces, rich burials andmonuments celebrating their conquests. All this is true in Mesoamerica aswell. 
In the wider region, the paradigm is set by a series of dynastic polities,located far from the Valley of Mexico in the Yucatán Peninsula and adjacenthighlands. Today’s historians know these polities as the Classic Maya (c.AD 150–900 – the term ‘classic’ is also applied to their ancient writtenlanguage and to the chronological period in question). Cities like Tikal,Calakmul or Palenque were dominated by royal temples, ball-courts(settings for competitive, sometimes lethal games), images of war andhumiliated captives (often publicly killed after ball games), complexcalendrical rituals celebrating royal ancestors, and records of the deeds andbiographies of living kings. In the modern imagination this has become the‘standard package’ of Mesoamerican kingship, associated with ancientcities throughout the region from Monte Alban (in Oaxaca, c.AD 500–800)to Tula (in central Mexico, c.AD 850–1150), and arguably reaching as farnorth as Cahokia (near what’s now East St Louis, c.AD 800–1200).
In Teotihuacan, all this seems to have been strikingly absent. Unlike inthe Mayan cities, there are few written inscriptions in general.7 (For thisreason, we don’t know what language was spoken by the majority ofTeotihuacan’s inhabitants, although we know the city was sufﬁcientlycosmopolitan to include among its population both Maya and Zapotecminorities familiar with the use of writing.)8 However, there remainsplenty of pictorial art. Teotihuacan’s citizens were proliﬁc craft specialistsand makers of images, leaving behind everything from monumental stone sculptures to diminutive terracotta ﬁgures that could be held in the palm, aswell as vivid wall paintings bustling with human activity (picture somethinglike the carnivalesque feel of a Bruegel street scene and you are not too faroff). Still, nowhere among some thousands of such images do we ﬁnd evena single representation of a ruler striking, binding or otherwise dominating asubordinate – unlike in the contemporary arts of the Maya and Zapotec,where this is a constant theme. Today scholars pore over Teotihuacanimagery, searching for anything that might be construed as a kingly ﬁgure,but largely they fail. In many cases the artists seem to have deliberatelyfrustrated such efforts, for instance by making all the ﬁgures in a givenscene exactly the same size.
Another key element of royal display in the ancient kingdoms ofMesoamerica, the ceremonial ball-court is also conspicuous by its absenceat Teotihuacan.9 Neither has there been found any equivalent to the greattombs of Sihyaj Chan K’awiil at Tikal or K’inich Janaab Pakal in Palenque.And not for lack of trying. Archaeologists have combed through the ancienttunnels around the Pyramids of the Sun and the Moon and under the Templeof the Feathered Serpent, only to discover that the passages do not lead toroyal tombs, or even robbed-out tomb chambers, but to chthonic labyrinthsand mineral-crusted shrines: evocations of other worlds, no doubt, but notthe graves of sacred rulers.10 

Some have suggested that the self-conscious rejection of outsideconvention at Teotihuacan runs even deeper. For instance, the city’s artistsappear to have been aware of formal and compositional principles foundamong their Mesoamerican neighbours, and to have set about deliberatelyinverting them. Where Maya and Zapotec art draws on a tradition of reliefcarving derived from the earlier Olmec kings of Veracruz, favouring curvesand ﬂowing forms, the sculpture of Teotihuacan shows humans andhumanoid ﬁgures as ﬂat composites, tightly ﬁtted to angular blocks. Somedecades ago, these contrasts led Esther Pasztory – a Hungarian-Americanart historian who spent much of her career studying Teotihuacan’s art andimagery – to a radical conclusion. What we have, she argued, with highlandTeotihuacan and the lowland Maya, is nothing less than a case of consciouscultural inversion – or what we’ve been calling schismogenesis – but thistime on the scale of urban civilizations.11 

Teotihuacan, in Pasztory’s view, created a new tradition of art to expressthe ways in which its society was different from that of its contemporaries elsewhere in Mesoamerica. In doing so it rejected both the speciﬁc visualtrope of ruler and captive and the gloriﬁcation of aristocratic individuals ingeneral. In this it was strikingly different from both the earlier culturaltradition of the Olmec, and from contemporary Maya polities. If the visualarts of Teotihuacan celebrated anything, Pasztory insisted, then it was thecommunity as a whole and its collective values, which – over a period ofsome centuries – successfully prevented the emergence of ‘dynasticpersonality cults’.12 

According to Pasztory, Teotihuacan was not just ‘anti-dynastic’ in spirit,it was itself a utopian experiment in urban life. Those who created itthought of themselves as creating a new and different kind of city, a Tollanfor the people, without overlords or kings. Following in Pasztory’sfootsteps, other scholars, eliminating virtually every other possibility,arrived at similar conclusions. In its early years, they concluded,Teotihuacan had gone some way down the road to authoritarian rule, butthen around AD 300 suddenly reversed course: possibly there was arevolution of sorts, followed by a more equal distribution of the city’sresources and the establishment of a kind of ‘collective governance’.13 

The general consensus among those who know the site best is thatTeotihuacan was, in fact, a city organized along some sort of self-consciously egalitarian lines. And, as we’ve seen, in world-historical termsall this is not nearly as weird or anomalous as scholars – or anyone else, forthat matter – tend to assume. It is equally true if we simply try tounderstand Teotihuacan within its Mesoamerican context. The city didn’tcome out of nowhere. While there might be a recognizable ‘package’ ofMesoamerican kingship, there also appears to have been a very different,dare we say republican, tradition as well.
What we propose to do in this chapter, then, is bring to the surface thisneglected strand of Mesoamerican social history: one of urban republics,large-scale projects of social welfare, and indigenous forms of democracythat can be followed down to the time of the Spanish conquest and beyond. 
IN WHICH WE FIRST CONSIDER AN EXAMPLE OF STRANGER-KINGS IN THE MAYA LOWLANDS, AND THEIRAFFILIATION WITH TEOTIHUACAN 
Let us start by leaving behind the city itself, and the valleys and plateaus ofcentral Mexico, for the tropical forest kingdoms of the Classic Maya, whoseruins lie to the east: in Mexico’s Yucatán Peninsula, and within the moderncountries of Guatemala, Belize, Honduras and El Salvador. In the ﬁfth century AD, something remarkable happens in the art and writing of some ofthese Maya city-states, including the largest and most prominent amongthem, Tikal.
Finely carved scenes on Mayan monuments of this period show ﬁguresseated on thrones, and wearing what can be instantly recognized as foreign,Teotihuacan-style dress and weaponry (the spear-throwers called atlatls,feathered shields, and so on), clearly distinct from the garb and ﬁnery oflocal rulers. Archaeologists working in western Honduras, near the borderwith Guatemala, have even unearthed what, judging by the grave goods,appear to be the actual burials of these stranger-kings at the base level of atemple at the site of Copán, which went through seven further phases ofconstruction. Here, glyphic inscriptions describe at least some of theseindividuals as actually coming from the Land of the Cattail Reeds.14 

Two things (at least) are very hard to explain here. First, why are thereimages of what appear to be Teotihuacano lords on thrones in Tikal, whenthere are no similar images of lords sitting on thrones at Teotihuacan itself?Second, how could Teotihuacan ever have mounted a successful militaryexpedition against a kingdom over 600 miles away? Most experts assumethe latter was simply impossible on logistical grounds, and they areprobably correct to do so (although we should keep an open mind; after all,who could have predicted on logistical grounds that a motley crew ofSpaniards would bring down a Mesoamerican empire of many millions?).The ﬁrst question certainly requires more careful consideration. Were theindividuals depicted as seated kings really from central Mexico at all?
It’s possible we are just dealing here with local lords who had a taste forexotica. We know from art and inscriptions that Maya grandees sometimesenjoyed dressing up in Teotihuacan warrior gear, sometimes beheld visionsof Teotihuacan spirits after ritual bloodletting, and generally liked to stylethemselves ‘Lords and Ladies of the West’. The city was certainly farenough away for the Maya to see it as a place of exotic fantasies, some kindof distant Shangri-La. But there are reasons to suspect it was more than justthat. For one thing, people did regularly move back and forth. Obsidianfrom Teotihuacan adorned the Maya gods, and Teotihuacan’s deities wore green quetzal feathers from the Maya lowlands. Mercenaries and traderswent both ways, pilgrimages and diplomatic visits followed; immigrantsfrom Teotihuacan built temples in Maya cities, and there was even a Mayaneighbourhood, replete with murals, at Teotihuacan itself.15 

How do we resolve the puzzle of this Mayan depiction of Teotihuacankings? Well, ﬁrst of all, if history teaches us anything about long-distancetrade routes, it’s that they are likely to be full of unscrupulous characters ofvarious sorts: bandits, runaways, grifters, smugglers, religious visionaries,spies – or ﬁgures who may be any combination of these at a given time.This was no less true in Mesoamerica than anywhere else. The Aztecs, forinstance, employed orders of heavily armed warrior-merchants calledpochteca, who also gathered intelligence on the cities where they traded.
History is also full of stories of adventurous travellers who either ﬁndthemselves taken into some alien society and miraculously transformedthere into kings or embodiments of sacred power: ‘stranger-kings’ likeCaptain James Cook, who – on casting anchor in Hawaii in 1779 – wasaccorded the status of an ancient Polynesian fertility god called Lono; orothers who, like Hernán Cortés, did their best to convince local people thatthey should be welcomed as such.16 Worldwide, a remarkably largepercentage of dynastic histories begin precisely this way, with a man (it’salmost always a man) who mysteriously appears from somewhere far away.It is easy to see how an adventurous traveller from a famous city mighthave taken advantage of such notions. Could something like this havehappened in the Maya lowlands in the ﬁfth century AD? 
From inscriptions at Tikal, we do know the names of some of theseparticular stranger-kings and their close associates, or at least the namesthey adopted as Maya nobles. One, called Sihyaj K’ahk’ (‘Born of Fire’),seems never himself to have ruled but helped install a series ofTeotihuacano ‘princes’ on Maya thrones, including the throne of Tikal. Wealso know that these princes married local women of high rank, and thattheir offspring became Maya rulers, who also celebrated their ancestralconnection to Teotihuacan: the ‘Tollan of the West’. 
From examination of burials at Copán we also know that, before theirelevation to royal status, at least some of these adventurous individuals ledextremely colourful lives, ﬁghting and travelling and ﬁghting again, andthat they may not originally have come either from Copán or fromTeotihuacan but somewhere else entirely.17 Taking all lines of evidence into account, it seems likely that these progenitors of Maya dynasties wereoriginally members of groups that specialized in long-distance travel –traders, soldiers of fortune, missionaries or perhaps even spies – who,perhaps quite suddenly, found themselves elevated to royalty.18 

There is a remarkable analogy for this process closer to our times. Manycenturies later, when the focus of Maya culture – and most of its largestcities – had shifted to Yucatán in the north, a similar wave of centralMexican inﬂuence occurred, most dramatically evident in the city ofChichén Itzá, whose Temple of the Warriors seems to be directly modelledon the Toltec capital of Tula (a later Tollan). Again, we don’t really knowwhat happened, but later chronicles, written secretly under Spanish rule,described the Itzá in almost exactly these terms: as a band of uprootedwarriors, ‘stuttering foreigners’ from the west, who managed to seizecontrol of a series of cities in Yucatán and ended up in a prolonged rivalrywith another dynasty of Toltec exiles – or at least, exiles who insisted theywere originally Toltec – called the Xiu.19 These chronicles are full of accounts of the exiles’ wanderings in the wilderness, temporary periods ofglory, accusations of oppression, and sombre prophecies of futuretribulation. Once again, we seem to be dealing with a feeling among theMaya that kings really should come from somewhere far away, and with thewillingness of at least a few unscrupulous foreigners to take advantage ofthis idea. 
All this is only guesswork. Still, it’s clear the images and records fromplaces like Tikal tell us more about Maya concepts of royal power than theydo about Teotihuacan itself, where not a shred of compelling evidence forthe institution of kingship has yet been found. The ‘Mexican’ princes of theMaya lowlands, bedecked in regalia and seated on thrones, were engagingin exactly the sort of grandiose political gestures that had no place in theirputative homeland. If not a monarchy, then, what was Teotihuacan? Thereis, we suggest, no one answer to this question – and over a period of ﬁvecenturies there is no particular reason why there ought to be. 
Let’s look at a central portion of the standard architectural plan ofTeotihuacan, pieced together from the most exhaustive survey of an urbanlandscape ever undertaken by archaeologists.20 Having gone to the lengthsof recording a built environment on that scale – all eight square miles of it –archaeologists naturally want to see it all at once, in a single gasp. Modern archaeology often presents to us something like the chronologicallycollapsed plan of Mohenjo-daro and other ‘ﬁrst cities’ with centuries oreven millennia of urban history folded into a single map. It’s visuallystunning, but actually quite ﬂat and artiﬁcial. In the case of Teotihuacan, itgives an effect at once harmonious and misleading.
At the centre, anchoring the whole mirage, stand the great monuments –the two Pyramids and the Ciudadela (Citadel) containing the Temple of theFeathered Serpent. Extending for miles around are smaller but stillimpressively appointed residences that housed the city’s population: some2,000 multi-family apartments, ﬁnely built from stone masonry andorganized on a tidy orthogonal grid, aligned to the ceremonial centre of thecity. It is an almost perfectly functional image of civic prosperity andhierarchy. We are, it would seem, in the presence of something like More’sUtopia or Campanella’s City of the Sun. But there is a problem. Theresidences and pyramids do not strictly belong together, or at least not all ofthem. Their construction occupies different phases of time. Nor is thetemple quite what it seems.
In fact, in historical terms it is all something of a grand illusion. Tounderstand what’s going on here we have to make some attempt, howevertentative, to reconstruct a basic chronological sequence for the city’sdevelopment. 
HOW THE PEOPLE OF TEOTIHUACAN TURNED THEIR BACKS ON MONUMENT-BUILDING AND HUMAN SACRIFICE, ANDINSTEAD EMBARKED ON A REMARKABLE PROJECT OF SOCIAL HOUSING 
Teotihuacan’s growth to urban dimensions began around the year 0. At thattime, whole populations were on the move across the Basin of Mexico andValley of Puebla, ﬂeeing the effects of seismic activity on their southernfrontiers, which included a Plinian eruption of the volcano Popocatépetl.From AD 50 to 150, the ﬂow of people into Teotihuacan siphoned life fromsurrounding areas. Villages and towns were abandoned, and also wholecities, like Cuicuilco, with its early traditions of pyramid-building. Underseveral feet of ash lie the ruins of other abandoned settlements. At the Pueblan site of Tetimpa, just eight miles from Popocatépetl, archaeologists 
have unearthed houses that foreshadow – on a smaller scale – the civic architecture of Teotihuacan.21 

Here the later chronicles do provide some useful, or at least thought-provoking accounts. Folk memories of a mass exodus survived right up tothe time of the conquista. One tradition, preserved in the work of theFranciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún, tells how Teotihuacan was foundedby a coalition of elders, priests and wise men from other settlements. As thecity grew it incorporated these smaller traditions, maize gods and villageancestors rubbing shoulders with urban deities of ﬁre and rain.
What we can refer to as Teotihuacan’s ‘Old City’ was organized on aparish system, with local shrines serving particular neighbourhoods. Thelayout of these district temples – three buildings around a central plaza –also follows the plan of earlier structures at Tetimpa, which housed the cultsof village ancestors.22 In these early days, from AD 100 to 200, theresidential quarters of Teotihuacan may well have looked like an enormousshanty town – but we don’t really know,23 just as we have no clear ideahow the ﬂedgling city divided access to arable land and other resourcesamong its citizens. Maize was widely farmed, to be eaten by humans anddomestic animals. People kept and ate turkeys, dogs, rabbits and hares.They also grew beans, and enjoyed access to whitetail deer and peccaries,as well as wild fruits and vegetables. Seafood arrived from the distant coast,presumably smoked or salted; but how far the various sectors of the urbaneconomy were integrated at this time, and how exactly resources werepulled in from a wider hinterland, is altogether unclear.24 



What we can say is that the Teotihuacanos’ efforts to create a civicidentity focused initially on the building of monuments: the raising of asacred city in the midst of the wider urban sprawl.25 This meant the creation of an entirely new landscape in the centre of Teotihuacan, requiringthe work of some thousands of labourers. Pyramid-mountains and artiﬁcialrivers went up, providing a stage for the performance of calendrical rituals.In a colossal feat of civil engineering, the channels of the Rio San Juan andRio San Lorenzo were diverted, tying them to the city’s orthogonal grid andtransforming their marshy banks into solid foundations (all this, recall,without the beneﬁt of working animals or metal tools). This in turn laid thebasis for a grand architectural programme which saw the erection of thePyramids of the Sun and the Moon and the Temple of the FeatheredSerpent. The temple faced a sunken plaza that captured the ﬂoodwaters ofthe San Juan to form a seasonal lake, its waters lapping at painted carvingsof plumed serpents and shells on the temple façade, making them glisten asrains began to fall in late spring.26 

All that effort of monumental construction required sacriﬁces, not just oflabour and resources but of human life. Each major phase of building isassociated with archaeological evidence of ritual killing. Adding togetherhuman remains from the two pyramids and the temple, the victims can becounted in the hundreds. Their bodies were placed in pits or trenchesarranged symmetrically to deﬁne the ground plan of the ediﬁce that wouldrise over them. At the corners of the Sun Pyramid, offerings of infants werefound; under the Moon Pyramid, foreign captives, some decapitated orotherwise mutilated; and in the foundations of the Temple of the FeatheredSerpent lay the corpses of male warriors, arms tied back at point of death,buried with the tools and trophies of their former trade. Among the bodieswere found obsidian knives and spearheads, trinkets of shell and greenstoneand collars made of human teeth and jawbones (some, as it turns out,cunningly faked in shell).27 

You would think that at this point – around AD 200 – the fate of Teotihuacan was sealed: its destiny to join the ranks of ‘classic’Mesoamerican civilizations with their strong traditions of warrior aristocracy and city-states governed by hereditary nobles. What we mightthen expect to see next, in the archaeological record, is a concentration ofpower around the city’s focal monuments: the rise of luxurious palaces,inhabited by rulers who were the font of wealth and privilege, with attachedquarters for elite kinsmen; and the development of monumental art toglorify their military conquests, the lucrative tribute it generated and theirservices to the gods. But the evidence tells a very different story, becausethe citizens of Teotihuacan chose a different path.
In fact, the entire trajectory of Teotihuacan’s political development seemsto have gone off on a remarkable tangent. Instead of building palaces andelite quarters, the citizens embarked on a remarkable project of urbanrenewal, supplying high-quality apartments for nearly all the city’spopulation, regardless of wealth or status.28 Without written sources, wecan’t really say why. Archaeologists are not yet able to distinguish theprecise sequence of events with any conﬁdence. But nobody doubts thatsomething did happen, and what we will try to do now is sketch out what it was. 
The big turnaround in Teotihuacan’s fortunes seems to have begun around AD 300. At that time, or shortly after, the Temple of the Feathered Serpentwas desecrated and its stores of offerings looted. Not only was it set on ﬁre;many of the gargoyle-like heads of the Feathered Serpent on its façade weresmashed or ground to a stump. A large-stepped platform was thenconstructed to its west, which made what was left of the temple invisiblefrom its main avenue. If you visit the heavily reconstructed ruins ofTeotihuacan today and wish to see what remains of its goggle-eyed godsand plumed snakeheads you will have to stand on top of this platform,which archaeologists call the adosada.29 

At this point all new pyramid construction stopped permanently, andthere is no further evidence of ritually sanctioned killing at the establishedPyramids of the Sun and Moon, which remained in use as civic monumentsuntil around AD 550 – albeit for other, less lethal purposes about which we know little.30 Instead, what we see after AD 300 is an extraordinary ﬂow ofurban resources into the provision of excellent stone-built housing, not justfor the wealthy or privileged but for the great majority of Teotihuacan’spopulation. These impressive apartments, laid out in regular plots from oneend of the city to the other, were probably not an innovation of this period. 
Their construction on a city-grid may have begun a century or so earlier, asdid the razing of older and more ramshackle dwellings to make way forthem.31 

Archaeologists at ﬁrst considered the masonry apartments to be palaces,and it is possible that is exactly how they began around AD 200, when thecity seemed set on a course of political centralization. But after AD 300,when the Temple of the Feathered Serpent was desecrated, theirconstruction continued apace, until most of the city’s 100,000 or soresidents were effectively living in ‘palatial’, or at least very comfortable,conditions.32 So what were these apartments like, and what kind of homesdid people make in them?
The evidence suggests we should picture small groups of nuclearfamilies, living comfortable lives in single-storey buildings, each equippedwith integral drainage facilities and ﬁnely plastered ﬂoors and walls. Eachfamily seems to have had its own set of rooms within the larger apartmentblock, complete with private porticoes where light entered the otherwisewindowless rooms. We can deduce that the average apartment compoundwould have housed in total around 100 people, who would haveencountered each other routinely in a central courtyard, which also seems tohave been the focus of domestic rituals, perhaps jointly observed. Most ofthese communal spaces were ﬁtted with altars in the standard style of civicconstruction (known as talud-tablero), and the walls were often brightlypainted with murals. Some courtyards had pyramid-shaped shrines,suggesting this architectural form had taken on new and less exclusive roleswithin the city.33 

René Millon, the archaeologist responsible for producing the ﬁrstdetailed map of Teotihuacan’s layout, felt that the apartment compound wasactually invented as a form of social housing, ‘designed for urban life in acity that was becoming increasingly crowded, perhaps approaching thechaotic’.34 Each block was initially laid out to similar scale anddimensions, on plots of roughly 3,600 square metres, although somedeviated from this ideal scheme. Strict uniformity was avoided in thearrangement of rooms and courtyards, so in the last resort each compoundwas unique. Even the more modest apartments show signs of a comfortablelifestyle, with access to imported goods and a staple diet of corn tortillas,eggs, turkey and rabbit meat, and the milk-hued drink known as pulque (analcoholic beverage fermented from the spiky agave plant).35 

In other words, few were deprived. More than that, many citizensenjoyed a standard of living that is rarely achieved across such a widesector of urban society in any period of urban history, including our own.Teotihuacan had indeed changed its course away from monarchy andaristocracy to become instead a ‘Tollan of the people’.
But how was this remarkable transformation achieved? Apart fromspoilage of the Temple of the Feathered Serpent, there are few signs ofviolence. Land and resources appear to have been allocated to familygroups who became neighbours. In this multi-ethnic city, each co-residential group of between sixty and 100 people would have enjoyed twokinds of communal life. One was based on kinship, with family tiesextending far beyond the apartment block and often beyond the city – tieswhich could have troublesome implications, as we’ll shortly see. The otherwas based more strictly on co-residence in apartments and neighbourhoods,often reinforced by shared craft specializations such as garment-making orobsidian-working.
Both forms of urban community, existing alongside one another, retaineda human scale, a world away from our modern conception of the ‘housingestate’ in which nuclear families are sequestered by the thousands in multi.storey monoliths. So we are back to the question with which we started:what held this ‘New Teotihuacan’ together, if not a hereditary elite or someother type of governing class?
Without written evidence it may never be possible to reconstruct thedetails, but by now we can probably rule out any sort of top-down system inwhich elite cadres of royal administrators or priests drew up plans and sentout orders. A more likely possibility is that authority was distributed amonglocal assemblies, perhaps answerable to a governing council. If any trace ofthese community associations survives it is in the district shrines known as‘three-temple complexes’. At least twenty such complexes were dispersedthroughout the city, serving a total of 2,000 apartments, one for every 100apartment blocks.36 

This might imply the delegation of government to neighbourhoodcouncils with constituencies similar in size to those of Mesopotamian city-wards, or the assembly houses of Ukrainian mega-sites we discussed inChapter Eight, or for that matter the barrios of later Mesoamerican towns. It may seem hard to imagine a city this size running successfully in this wayfor centuries without strong leaders or an extensive bureaucracy; but as we’ll see, ﬁrst-hand accounts of later cities from the time of the Spanishconquest lend credence to the idea.
Another, more ebullient face of Teotihuacan’s civic identity is revealed inits mural art. Despite efforts to see them as sombre religious iconography,these playful pictorial scenes – painted on the interior walls of apartmentcompounds from around AD 350 – often seem veritably psychedelic.37 
Streaming efﬁgies emerge from clustered plant, human and animal bodies,framed by ﬁgures with elaborate costumes, sometimes graspinghallucinogenic seeds and mushrooms; and among the crowd scenes we ﬁndﬂower eaters with rainbows bursting from their heads.38 Such scenes often depict human ﬁgures all at roughly the same size, with no individual raisedup over another.39 

Of course, these murals represent Teotihuacanos as they liked to imaginethemselves; social realities are always more complex. Archaeologicalexcavations in a part of the city known as Teopancazco, lying south of thecity centre, show just how complex those realities could actually get. Tracesof domestic life in Teopancazco dating to around AD 350 reveal the afﬂuent life of its inhabitants, whose shell-ornamented cotton dress suggests theyoriginally came from the Gulf Coast and continued to trade with that region.From there they also brought with them certain customs, includingunusually violent rituals, which are not so far documented elsewhere in thecity. These seem to have involved the capture and decapitation of foreignenemies, whose heads were kept and buried in offering vessels, foundwithin their private homes.40 

Now here we have something going on that would obviously be verydifﬁcult to square with the idea of communal living on a large scale; andthis is precisely our point. Below the surface of civil society at Teotihuacanthere must have been all sorts of social tensions simmering away amonggroups of radically different ethnic and linguistic backgrounds who wereconstantly moving in and out, consolidating relationships with foreigntrading partners, cultivating alter egos in remote places and sometimesbringing those forms of identity back with them. (We might allow ourselvesto imagine what would happen should a Teotihuacano freebooter who’dmanaged to make himself King of Tikal ever have returned home.) Byaround AD 550, the social fabric of the city had begun to come apart at theseams. There is no compelling evidence of foreign invasion. Things seemsto have disintegrated from within. Almost as suddenly as it had once 
coalesced some ﬁve centuries previously, the city’s population dispersedagain, leaving their Tollan behind them.41 

The rise and decline of Teotihuacan set in motion a roughly cyclicalpattern of demographic concentration and dispersal in central Mexico whichrepeated itself a number of times between AD 300 and 1200, down to thedisintegration of Tula and the fall of the Toltec state.42 Over this longerspan of time, what was the legacy of Teotihuacan and its grand urbanexperiment? Should we view the whole episode as a passing deviation, ablip (albeit an extremely large blip) on the road that led from Olmechierarchy to Toltec aristocracy and eventually Aztec imperialism? Or mightthe egalitarian aspects of Teotihuacan have a distinct legacy of their own?Few have really considered the latter possibility, but there are good reasonsto ask, especially since early Spanish accounts of the Mexican highlandsprovide some extraordinarily suggestive material – including descriptionsof indigenous cities which, to European eyes, could only be understood asrepublics, or even democracies. 
ON THE CASE OF TLAXCALA, AN INDIGENOUS REPUBLICTHAT RESISTED THE AZTEC EMPIRE THEN CAME TO JOIN FORCES WITH SPANISH INVADERS, AND HOW ITS FATEFULDECISION EMERGED FROM DEMOCRATIC DELIBERATIONS IN AN URBAN PARLIAMENT (AS OPPOSED TO THEDAZZLING EFFECTS OF EUROPEAN TECHNOLOGY ON ‘INDIAN MINDS’) 
With this in mind, let’s now consider a very different case of culturalcontact, which takes us forwards in time to the beginnings of Europeanexpansion in the Americas. It concerns an indigenous city-state by the nameof Tlaxcala, adjacent to what’s now the Mexican state of Puebla, whichplayed a pivotal role in the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire or TripleAlliance. Here is how Charles C. Mann, in his acclaimed 1491: New Revelations of the Americas before Columbus (2005), describes whathappened in 1519 when Hernán Cortés passed through: 
Marching inland from the sea, the Spanish at ﬁrst fought repeatedly
with Tlaxcala, a confederation of four small kingdoms that had
maintained its independence despite repeated Alliance incursions. 
Thanks to their guns, horses, and steel blades, the foreigners wonevery battle, even with Tlaxcala’s huge numerical advantage. ButCortés’s forces shrank with every ﬁght. He was on the verge oflosing everything when the four Tlaxcala kings abruptly reversedcourse. Concluding from the results of their battles that they couldwipe out the Europeans, though at great cost, the Indian leadersoffered what seemed a win-win deal: they would stop attackingCortés, sparing his life, the lives of the surviving Spaniards, andthose of many Indians, if he in return would join with Tlaxcala in aunited assault on the hated Triple Alliance.43 

Now there is a basic problem with this account. There were no kings inTlaxcala. Therefore, it could not in any sense be described as aconfederation of kingdoms. So how did Mann come to think there were? Asan award-winning science journalist, but not a specialist in the history ofsixteenth-century Mesoamerica, he was at the mercy of secondary sources;and this, it turns out, is where much of the problem begins.
No doubt Mann must have assumed (as would any reasonable person)that if Tlaxcala were anything other than a kingdom – say a republic or ademocracy, or even some form of oligarchy – then the secondary literaturewould have been full of lively debates about what this implies, not just forour understanding of the Spanish conquest as a key turning point in modernworld history, but for the development of indigenous societies inMesoamerica, or indeed for political theory in general. Oddly, he’d havebeen wrong to assume this.44 Finding ourselves in a similar position, wedecided to delve a little deeper. What we found, we must admit, was ratherstartling, even to us. Let’s begin by comparing Mann’s account to the oneCortés himself addressed to his king, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V.
In his Five Letters of Relation, written between 1519 and 1526, HernánCortés recounts his entry to the mountain-ringed Valley of Puebla, on thesouthern tip of the Mexican altiplano. The valley at that time shelterednumerous native cities, of which the largest included pyramid-studdedCholula, and also the city of Tlaxcala. It was indeed in Tlaxcala that Cortésfound local allies who fought alongside him, advancing ﬁrst on Cholula andthen going on to defeat the armies of Moctezuma the Younger and lay wasteto the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan, in the neighbouring Valley of Mexico.Cortés estimated the population of Tlaxcala and its rural dependencies at 150,000. ‘There is a market in this city,’ he reported back to Charles V, ‘inwhich more than thirty thousand people are occupied in buying and selling,’and the province ‘contains many wide-spreading fertile valleys all tilled andsown, no part of it being left wild, and measures some ninety leagues incircumference’. Also, the ‘order of government so far observed among thepeople resembles very much the republics of Venice, Genoa, and Pisa forthere is no supreme overlord.’45 

Cortés was a minor aristocrat from a part of Spain where even municipalcouncils were still something of a novelty; one might argue he had little realknowledge of republics and therefore would hardly be the most reliablejudge of such matters. Perhaps so; but by 1519 he had considerableexperience in identifying Mesoamerican kings and either recruiting orneutralizing them, since this is largely what he had been doing since hisarrival on the mainland. In Tlaxcala, he couldn’t ﬁnd any. Instead, after aninitial clash with Tlaxcalteca warriors, he found himself engaged withrepresentatives of a popular urban council whose every decision had to becollectively ratiﬁed. Here is where things become decidedly strange, interms of how the history of these events has come down to us.
It is worth emphasizing again that we are dealing here with what is, bymost estimations, one of the pivotal episodes of modern world history: theevents leading directly up to the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, anda blueprint for subsequent European conquests throughout the Americas.We assume that nobody – even the most ardent believer in the forces oftechnological progress, or ‘guns, germs, and steel’ – would go so far as toclaim that fewer than 1,000 Spaniards could ever have conqueredTenochtitlan (a highly organized city, covering over ﬁve square miles,containing roughly a quarter of a million people) without the help of theseindigenous allies, who included some 20,000 warriors from Tlaxcala. Inwhich case, to understand what was really going on it becomes crucial tounderstand why the Tlaxcalteca decided to joined forces with Cortés, andhow – with a population of tens of thousands, and no supreme overlord togovern them – they arrived at a decision to do so.
On the ﬁrst matter, our sources are clear. The Tlaxcalteca were out tosettle old scores. From their perspective, an alliance with Cortés mightbring to a favourable end their struggles against the Aztec Triple Alliance,and the so-called ‘Flowery Wars’ between the Valleys of Puebla andMexico.46 As usual, most of our sources reﬂect the perspective of Aztec elites, who liked to portray Tlaxcala’s long-standing resistance to theirimperial yoke as something between a game and imperial largesse (theyallowed the Tlaxcalteca to remain independent, the Aztecs later insisted totheir Spanish conquerors, because, after all, the empire’s soldiers neededsomewhere to train; their priests needed a stockyard of human victims forsacriﬁce to the gods, and so forth). But this was braggadocio. In fact,Tlaxcala and its Otomí guerrilla units had been holding the Aztecssuccessfully at bay for generations. Their resistance was not just military.Tlaxcalteca cultivated a civic ethos that worked against the emergence ofambitious leaders, and hence potential quislings – a counter-example toAztec principles of governance.
Here we come to the crux of the problem.
Politically, the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan and the city-state of Tlaxcalaembodied opposite ideals (no less than, say, ancient Sparta and Athens).Still, little of this history is known, because the story we’ve become used totelling about the conquest of the Americas is an entirely different one. Thefall of Tenochtitlan in 1521 is often used to illustrate what some feel to be deeper, underlying currents of change in human societies: the forces thatgive history its overall shape and direction. Starting with Alfred Crosby andJared Diamond,47 writers in this vein have repeatedly pointed out that theconquistadors had something akin to manifest destiny on their side. Not thedivinely ordained sort of destiny they envisaged for themselves, but ratherthe unstoppable force of an invisible army of Neolithic Old Worldmicrobes, marching alongside the Spaniards, carrying waves of smallpox todecimate indigenous populations, and a Bronze Age legacy of metalweapons, guns and horses to shock and awe the helpless natives.
We like to tell ourselves that Europeans introduced the Americas not justto these agents of destruction but also to modern industrial democracy,ingredients for which were nowhere to be found there, not even in embryo.All this supposedly came as a single cultural package: advanced metallurgy,animal-powered vehicles, alphabetic writing systems and a certain penchantfor freethinking that is seen as necessary for technological progress.‘Natives’, in contrast, are assumed to have existed in some sort ofalternative, quasi-mystical universe. They could not, by deﬁnition, bearguing about political constitutions or engaging in processes of soberdeliberation over decisions that changed the course of world history; and ifEuropean observers report them doing so, they must either be mistaken, or were simply projecting on to ‘Indians’ their own ideas about democraticgovernance, even when those ideas were hardly practised in Europe itself.
As we’ve also seen, this way of reading history would have been quitealien to Enlightenment philosophers, who were more inclined to think theirideals of freedom and equality owed much to the peoples of the New Worldand were by no means certain if those ideals were at all compatible withindustrial advance. We are dealing, again, with powerful modern myths.Such myths don’t merely inform what people say: to an even greater extent,they ensure certain things go unnoticed. Some of the key early sources onTlaxcala have never even appeared in translation, and new data emerging inrecent years has not really been noticed outside specialist circles. Let’s seeif we can’t set the record straight.
How, exactly, did the Tlaxcalteca arrive at a decision to ally with Cortéson the ﬁeld of battle, thereby ensuring the Spaniards’ victory over the AztecEmpire? It is clear the matter was fraught and deeply divisive (as it was inother Pueblan cities as well: in Cholula, for example, the same dilemmaoccasioned a rupture between the leaders of six calpolli – urban wards – three of whom took the others hostage, whereupon the latter absconded toTlaxcala).48 In Tlaxcala itself, though, the argument took a very differentform to what happened in Cholula.
Some of the evidence is to be found in Bernal Díaz’s famous Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España (1568), which containslengthy passages on the Spaniards’ interactions with warriors andemissaries from Tlaxcala. Another much-used source is the illustrated codex known as Historia de Tlaxcala (1585), by the mestizo historianDiego Muñoz Camargo; and there are also important writings by theFrancisan friar Toribio of Benavente. But the most detailed source – in our minds the key one – is a book that is hardly ever cited; in fact, it is hardlyever read, at least by historians (though specialists in Renaissancehumanism sometimes comment on its literary style). We are referring to theunﬁnished Crónica de la Nueva España, composed between 1558 and 1563by Francisco Cervantes de Salazar, one of the ﬁrst rectors of the Universityof Mexico.49 

Cervantes de Salazar was born around 1515 in the Spanish city of Toledoand studied at the prestigious University of Salamanca, where his scholarlyreputation was second to none. After a time in Flanders he became Latinsecretary to the Archbishop of Seville; this gained him entry to the court of Charles V, where he heard Hernán Cortés relating his experiences of theNew World. This young and gifted scholar soon became a devotee of theconquistador, and within a few years of Cortés’s death in 1547 Cervantes deSalazar set sail for Mexico. On arrival, he taught Latin on premises ownedby Cortés’s son and heir, but soon became a central ﬁgure in the newlyestablished university while also taking holy orders; he would attempt tojuggle ecclesiastical and scholarly duties for the remainder of his life, withmixed success. 
In 1558 the Municipality of Mexico, composed mainly of ﬁrst-generationconquistadors or their descendants, was sufﬁciently impressed withCervantes de Salazar’s scholarly abilities to grant him his greatest wish: anannual stipend of 200 gold pesos to support his composition of a generalhistory of New Spain, focusing on the themes of discovery and conquest.This was quite the endorsement and, two years later, Cervantes de Salazar(already some way into his manuscript) won a further grant, which wasspeciﬁcally intended to support a period of ﬁeldwork. He must have visitedTlaxcala and its environs during that time in order to obtain valuablehistorical evidence directly from local caciques who lived through theconquista, and from their immediate descendants.50 

The municipality appears to have kept its appointed chronicler on a tightleash, demanding three-monthly updates on his manuscript. His lastsubmission came in 1563, by which time, despite his best efforts, he wasembroiled in a bitter ecclesiastical dispute that put him on the wrong side ofthe General Inquisitor, the powerful Pedro Moya de Contreras. In thoseacrimonious years, Cervantes de Salazar saw Martín Cortés and many of hisother close associates variously imprisoned, tortured or exiled as rebelsagainst the Spanish Crown. Cervantes de Salazar made sufﬁcientcompromises to escape such a fate; but his reputation suffered, and to thisday he is often regarded as a minor academic source by comparison, say,with Bernardino de Sahagún. Ultimately, both scholars’ work would meet asimilar fate, delivered to the imperial councils of the Indies and theInquisition in Spain for obligatory censorship of matters relating to‘idolatrous practices’ (though not, it seems, on matters of indigenouspolitics), without allowing any original or copy to remain in circulation.51 

The result was that, for a period of centuries, Cervantes de Salazar’sCrónica was effectively hiding in plain sight.52 It is largely to theremarkable efforts of Zelia Maria Magdalena Nuttall (1857–1933) – 
pioneering archaeologist, anthropologist and ﬁnder of lost codices – that weowe not just the rediscovery of Cervantes de Salazar’s unﬁnished Crónica de la Nueva España, which she identiﬁed in the Biblioteca Nacional inMadrid in 1911, but also most of the surviving details of his life and thecircumstances of its composition, which she extracted from the archives ofthe town council in the city of Mexico, ﬁnding (to her astonishment) thatless careful historians who went before her had discovered nothing worthyof note there. It was only in 1914 that the Crónica saw publication. To thisday there is still no critical introduction or commentary to guide readersthrough its sixteenth-century prose, or point them towards its signiﬁcance asa record of political affairs in an indigenous Mesoamerican city.53 

Critics have emphasized that Cervantes de Salazar was writing a fewdecades after the facts he described, basing his chronicle on earlier accounts
– but this is equally true of other key sources regarding the Spanishconquest. They also note he wasn’t a particularly competent ethnographerin the mould of, say, Sahagún, being more steeped in the works of Horaceand Livy than the indigenous traditions of Mexico. All this may be true, justas it is true that the literary tradition prevailing at the time tended to invokeGreek and especially Roman examples at the drop of a hat. Still, theCrónica is clearly not some kind of projection of Salazar’s classicaltraining. It contains rich descriptions of indigenous ﬁgures and institutionsfrom the time of the Spanish invasion which bear no resemblance to anyclassical sources and which in many cases are corroborated by ﬁrst-handaccounts. What are not, apparently, in those other accounts are the detailsthat Cervantes de Salazar provides.
Of special interest to us are those extended sections of the Crónica that deal directly with the governing council of Tlaxcala, and its deliberationsover whether to ally with the Spanish invaders. They include lengthyaccounts of speeches and diplomatic gifts going back and forth betweenrepresentatives of the Spaniards and their Tlaxcalteca counterparts, whoseoratory in council occasioned much admiration. According to Cervantes deSalazar, those who spoke for Tlaxcala included elder statesmen – such asXicotencatl the Elder, father to the military general also named Xicotencatlwho is still lionized in the state of Tlaxcala to this day54 – but also masters of commerce, religious experts and the top legal authorities of the time.What Salazar describes in these remarkable passages is evidently not theworkings of a royal court but of a mature urban parliament, which sought consensus for its decisions through reasoned argument and lengthydeliberations – carrying on, when necessary, for weeks at a time.
The key passages are in Book Three. Cortés is still encamped outside thecity with his newfound Totonac allies. Ambassadors move back and forthbetween the Spaniards and the Ayuntamiento (city council) of Tlaxcala,where deliberations commence. After many welcomes and much kissing ofhands, a lord named Maxixcatzin – well known for his ‘great prudence andaffable conversation’ – gets the ball rolling with an eloquent appeal for theTlaxcalteca to follow his lead (indeed, to follow what the gods andancestors ordained), and ally with Cortés to rise up against their commonAztec oppressors. His reasoning is widely accepted in the council, until thatis, Xicotencatl the Elder – by then over 100 years old and almost blind –intervenes. 
A chapter follows, detailing ‘the brave speech that Xicotencatl made,contradicting Maxixcatzin’. Nothing, he reminds the council, is harder toresist than an ‘enemy within’, which is what the newcomers will likelybecome if welcomed into town. Why, asks Xicotencatl, 
… does Maxixcatzin deem these people gods, who seem more likeravenous monsters thrown up by the intemperate sea to blight us,gorging themselves on gold, silver, stones, and pearls; sleeping intheir own clothes; and generally acting in the manner of those whowould one day make cruel masters … There are barely enoughchickens, rabbits, or corn-ﬁelds in the entire land to feed theirbottomless appetites, or those of their ravenous ‘deer’ [the Spanishhorses]. Why would we – who live without servitude, and neveracknowledged a king – spill our blood, only to make ourselves intoslaves?55 

Members of the council, we learn, were swayed by Xicotencatl’s words: ‘amurmur began among them, speaking with each other, the voices wererising, each one declaring what he felt.’ The council was divided, andwithout consensus. What followed would be familiar to anyone who hasparticipated in a process of consensus decision-making: when matters seemto come to loggerheads, rather than putting it to a vote someone proposes acreative synthesis. Temilotecutl – one of the city’s four ‘senior justices’ –stepped in with a cunning plan. To satisfy both sides of the debate, Cortés would be invited into the city, but as soon as he entered Tlaxcaltecaterritory the city’s leading general, Xicotencatl the Younger, would ambushhim, together with a contingent of Otomí warriors. If the ambushsucceeded, they would be heroes. If it failed, they would blame it on theuncouth and impulsive Otomí, make their excuses, and ally themselves withthe invaders. 
We need not rehearse here the events leading to an alliance betweenTlaxcala and Cortés;56 we have said enough to give the reader a ﬂavour ofour sources concerning the democracy of Tlaxcala, and the facility of itspoliticians in reasoned debate. Such accounts have not fared well in thehands of modern historians. Few would go so far as to suggest that what deSalazar described never really happened, or was simply his ownimagination of a scene from some ancient Greek agora or Roman senate,placed into the mouths of ‘Indians’. Yet on those rare occasions when theCrónica is considered by scholars today, it is mostly as a contribution to theliterary genre of early Catholic humanism rather than as a source ofhistorical information about indigenous forms of government – in much thesame way that commentators on the writings of Lahontan never reallyconcern themselves with what Kandiaronk might actually have argued, butdwell on the possibility that some passages might be inspired by Greeksatirists like Lucian.57 

There is a subtle snobbery at play here. It’s not so much that anyonedenies outright that accounts of deliberative politics reﬂect historical reality;it’s just that no one seems to ﬁnd this fact particularly interesting. Whatseems interesting to historians is invariably the relation of these accounts toEuropean textual traditions, or European expectations. Much the sameoccurs with the treatment of later texts from Tlaxcala: extant, detailedwritten records of the proceedings at its municipal council in the decadesfollowing the Spanish conquest, the Tlaxcalan Actas, which afﬁrm at lengthboth the oratorical skills of indigenous politicians and their facility withprinciples of consensus decision-making and reasoned debate.58 

You might think all this would be of interest to historians. Instead, whatreally seems to strike them as worthy of debate is the degree to whichdemocratic mores displayed in the texts might be some sort of near-miraculous adaptation by ‘astute Indians’ to the political expectations oftheir European masters: effectively some kind of elaborate play-acting.59 
Why such historians imagine that a collection of sixteenth-century Spanish friars, petty aristocrats and soldiers were likely to know anything aboutdemocratic procedure (much less, be impressed by it) is unclear, becauseeducated opinion in Europe was almost uniformly anti-democratic at thetime. If anyone was learning something new from the encounter, it wassurely the Spaniards.
In the current intellectual climate, to suggest the Tlaxcalteca wereanything but cynics or victims is considered just a tiny bit dangerous: one isopening oneself up to charges of naive romanticism.60 In fact, these daysmore or less any attempt to suggest that Europeans learned anything at allof moral or social value from Native American people is likely to be metwith mild derision and accusations of indulging in ‘noble savage’ tropes, oroccasionally almost hysterical condemnation.61 

But a strong case can be made that the deliberations recorded in Spanishsources are exactly what they seem to be – a glimpse into the mechanics ofcollective indigenous government – and if these deliberations bear anysuperﬁcial resemblance to debates recorded in Thucydides or Xenophon,this is because, well, there are really only so many ways to conduct apolitical debate. At least one Spanish source provides explicit conﬁrmationin this regard. Here we turn to Friar Toribio of Benavente, called by localsMotolinía (the ‘afﬂicted one’) for his ragged appearance, a sobriquet heseems to have happily adopted. It is to Motolinía and his Tlaxcaltecainformants – who included Antonio Xicotencatl, most likely a grandson ofXicotencatl the Elder – that we owe the Historia de los Indios de la Nueva España (1541).62 

Motolinía conﬁrms Cortés’s original observation: that Tlaxcala wasindeed an indigenous republic governed not by a king, nor even by rotatingofﬁce holders (as at Cholula), but by a council of elected ofﬁcials (teuctli)answerable to the citizenry as a whole. Exactly how many sat on the highcouncil of Tlaxcala is not clear: Spanish sources suggest any number fromﬁfty to 200. Perhaps it depended on the matter at hand. Neither,unfortunately, does he tell us anything in detail about how these individualswere selected for ofﬁce, or who was eligible (other Pueblan cities, includingroyal ones, rotated ofﬁcial duties among representatives of calpolli). On thetopic of Tlaxcalteca modes of political training and instruction, however,Motolinía’s account comes alive. 
Those who aspired to a role on the council of Tlaxcala, far from beingexpected to demonstrate personal charisma or the ability to outdo rivals, did so in a spirit of self-deprecation – even shame. They were required tosubordinate themselves to the people of the city. To ensure that thissubordination was no mere show, each was subject to trials, starting withmandatory exposure to public abuse, regarded as the proper reward ofambition, and then – with one’s ego in tatters – a long period of seclusion,in which the aspiring politician suffered ordeals of fasting, sleepdeprivation, bloodletting and a strict regime of moral instruction. Theinitiation ended with a ‘coming out’ of the newly constituted public servant,amid feasting and celebration.63 

Clearly, taking up ofﬁce in this indigenous democracy requiredpersonality traits very different to those we take for granted in modernelectoral politics. On this latter point, it is worth recalling that ancientGreek writers were well aware of the tendency for elections to throw upcharismatic leaders with tyrannical pretensions. This is why they consideredelections an aristocratic mode of political appointment, quite at odds withdemocratic principles; and why for much of European history the trulydemocratic way of ﬁlling ofﬁces was assumed to be by lottery.
Cortés may have praised Tlaxcala as an agrarian and commercial arcadiabut, as Motolinía explains, when its citizens thought about their ownpolitical values, they actually saw those values as coming from the desert.Like other Nahuatl speakers, including the Aztecs, Tlaxcalteca liked toclaim they were descended from Chichimec. These were considered theoriginal hunter-gatherers who lived ascetic lives in deserts and forests,dwelling in primitive huts, ignorant of village or city life, rejecting corn andcooked food, bereft of clothing or organized religion, and living on wildthings alone.64 The ordeals endured by aspiring councillors in Tlaxcalawere reminders of the need to cultivate Chichimec qualities (ultimately tobe balanced by the Toltec virtues of an urbane warrior; and just where thecorrect balance lay was much debated among the Tlaxcalteca).
If all this sounds a little familiar, we must ask ourselves why. TheSpanish friars will no doubt have heard echoes in these tales of Old Worldtropes for republican virtue – that same atavistic streak running from thebiblical prophets through to Ibn Khaldun, not to mention their own ethic ofworld renunciation. The correspondences are so close that one begins towonder if, in their auto-ethnography, the Tlaxcalteca in this case actuallydid present themselves to Spaniards in terms they knew would be instantlyrecognized and understood. Certainly, we know that the citizens of Tlaxcala staged some remarkable theatrical spectacles for the beneﬁt of theirconquerors, including a 1539 pageant of the Crusader Conquest ofJerusalem, in which the climax was a mass baptism of (actual) pagans,dressed up as Moors.65 

Spanish observers may even have learned from Tlaxcalteca or Aztecsources what it means to have once been a ‘noble savage’. Nor can we ruleout the possibility that indigenous Mexican ideas on the subject enteredwider streams of European political thought that gathered force only in thedays of Rousseau, whose State of Nature maps with alarming ﬁdelity on toMotolinía’s account of the Chichimec, right down to the ‘primitive hutdwellings’ in which they were supposed to have lived. Perhaps some of theseeds of our own evolutionary story about how it all began with simple,egalitarian hunter-gatherers were sown right there, in the imaginations ofcity-dwelling Amerindians.
But we digress.
Amid all this mutual positioning, what can we really conclude about thepolitical constitution of Tlaxcala at the time of the Spanish conquest? Was itreally a functioning urban democracy and, if so, how many other suchdemocracies might have existed in the pre-Columbian Americas? Or are weconfronting a mirage, a strategic conjuring of the ‘ideal commonwealth’,supplied to a receptive audience of millenarian friars? Were elements ofhistory and mimesis both at work?
If all we had to go on were written sources, there would always be roomfor doubt; but archaeologists conﬁrm that by the fourteenth century AD the city of Tlaxcala was, in fact, already organized on an entirely different basisto Tenochtitlan. There is no sign of a palace or central temple, and no majorball-court (an important setting, recall, for royal ritual in otherMesoamerican cities). Instead, archaeological survey reveals a cityscapegiven over almost entirely to the well-appointed residences of its citizens,constructed to uniformly high standards around more than twenty districtplazas, all raised up on grand earthen terraces. The largest municipalassemblies were housed in a civic complex called Tizatlan, but this waslocated outside the city itself, with spaces for public gatherings entered viabroad gateways.66 

Modern archaeological investigations thus conﬁrm the existence of anindigenous republic at Tlaxcala long before Cortés set foot on Mexican soil,while later written sources leave us in little doubt as to its democratic credentials. The contrasts with other known Mesoamerican cities of the time are quite striking – though it should also be said that ﬁfth-centuryAthens was something of an outlier, surrounded by petty kingdoms andoligarchies. Nor should these contrasts be overdrawn. What we havelearned in this chapter is that the political traditions of Tlaxcala are not ananomaly, but lie in one broad stream of urban development which can betraced back, in outline, to the experiments in social welfare undertaken1,000 years earlier at Teotihuacan. Despite Aztec claims to a specialrelationship with that abandoned city, Tlaxcala was at least as much a partof its legacy as the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan – and in most reallysigniﬁcant ways, more so.
After all, it was the Aztec rulers of Tenochtitlan who ﬁnally broke withtradition, creating a predatory empire that was in some ways closer to thedominant European political models of the time, or what has since come tobe known as ‘the state’. In the next chapter, we intend to turn back andconsider this term. What precisely is a state? Does it really mark an entirelynew phase of human history? Is the term even useful any more? 

10 

Why the State Has No Origin 
The humble beginnings of sovereignty, bureaucracy and politics 
The quest for the ‘origins of the state’ is almost as long-standing, and hotlycontested, as the pursuit of the ‘origins of social inequality’ – and in manyways, it is just as much of a fool’s errand. It is generally accepted that,today, pretty much everyone in the world lives under the authority of astate; likewise, a broad feeling exists that past polities such as PharaonicEgypt, Shang China, the Inca Empire or the kingdom of Benin qualify asstates, or at least as ‘early states’. However, with no consensus amongsocial theorists about what a state actually is, the problem is how to comeup with a deﬁnition that includes all these cases but isn’t so broad as to beabsolutely meaningless. This has proved surprisingly hard to do.
Our term ‘the state’ only came into common usage in the late sixteenthcentury, when it was coined by a French lawyer named Jean Bodin, whoalso wrote, among many other things, an inﬂuential treatise on witchcraft,werewolves and the history of sorcerers. (He is further remembered todayfor his profound hatred of women.) But perhaps the ﬁrst to attempt asystematic deﬁnition was a German philosopher named Rudolf von Ihering,who, in the late nineteenth century, proposed that a state should be deﬁnedas any institution that claims a monopoly on the legitimate use of coerciveforce within a given territory (this deﬁnition has since come to be identiﬁedwith the sociologist Max Weber). On this deﬁnition, a government is a‘state’ if it lays claim to a certain stretch of land and insists that, within itsborders, it is the only institution whose agents can kill people, beat them up,cut off parts of their body or lock them in cages; or, as von Iheringemphasized, that can decide who else has the right to do so on its behalf.
Von Ihering’s deﬁnition worked fairly well for modern states. However, itsoon became clear that for most of human history, rulers either didn’t make such grandiose claims – or, if they did, their claims to a monopoly oncoercive force held about the same status as their claims to control the tides or the weather. To retain von Ihering and Weber’s deﬁnition one wouldeither have to conclude that, say, Hammurabi’s Babylon, Socrates’ Athensor England under William the Conqueror weren’t states at all – or come upwith a more ﬂexible or nuanced deﬁnition. Marxists offered one: theysuggested that states make their ﬁrst appearance in history to protect thepower of an emerging ruling class. As soon as one has a group of peopleliving routinely off the labour of another, the argument ran, they willnecessarily create an apparatus of rule, ofﬁcially to protect their propertyrights, in reality to preserve their advantage (a line of thinking very much inthe tradition of Rousseau). This deﬁnition brought Babylon, Athens andmedieval England back into the fold, but also introduced new conceptualproblems, such as how to deﬁne exploitation. And it was unpalatable toliberals, ruling out any possibility that the state could ever become abenevolent institution. 
For much of the twentieth century, social scientists preferred to deﬁne astate in more purely functional terms. As society became more complex,they argued, it was increasingly necessary for people to create top-downstructures of command in order to co-ordinate everything. This same logicis still followed in essence by most contemporary theorists of socialevolution. Evidence of ‘social complexity’ is automatically treated asevidence for the existence of some sort of governing apparatus. If one canspeak, say, of a settlement hierarchy with four levels (e.g. cities, towns,villages, hamlets), and if at least some of those settlements also containedfull-time craft specialists (potters, blacksmiths, monks and nuns,professional soldiers or musicians), then whatever apparatus administered itmust ipso facto be a state. And even if that apparatus did not claim amonopoly of force, or support a class of elites living off the toil ofbenighted labourers, this was inevitably going to happen sooner or later.This deﬁnition, too, has its advantages, especially when speculating aboutvery ancient societies, whose nature and organization has to be teased outfrom fragmentary remains; but its logic is entirely circular. Basically, all itsays is that, since states are complicated, any complicated socialarrangement must therefore be a state.
Actually, almost all these ‘classic’ theoretical formulations of the lastcentury started off from exactly this assumption: that any large and complex society necessarily required a state. The real bone of contention was, why?Was it for good practical reasons? Or was it because any such society wouldnecessarily produce a material surplus, and if there was a material surplus –like, for instance, all that smoked ﬁsh on the Paciﬁc Northwest Coast – thenthere would also, necessarily, be people who managed to grab hold of adisproportionate share?
As we’ve already seen in Chapter Eight, these assumptions don’t hold upparticularly well for the earliest cities. Early Uruk, for example, does notappear to have been a ‘state’ in any meaningful sense of the word; what’smore, when top-down rule does emerge in the region of ancientMesopotamia, it’s not in the ‘complex’ metropolises of the lowland rivervalleys, but among the small, ‘heroic’ societies of the surrounding foothills,which were averse to the very principle of administration and, as a result,don’t seem to qualify as ‘states’ either. If there is a good ethnographicparallel for these latter groups it might be the societies of the NorthwestCoast, since there too political leadership lay in the hands of a boastful andvainglorious warrior aristocracy, competing in extravagant contests overtitles, treasures, the allegiance of commoners and the ownership of slaves.Recall, here, that Haida, Tlingit and the rest not only lacked anything thatcould be called a state apparatus; they lacked any kind of formalgovernmental institutions.1 

One might then argue that ‘states’ ﬁrst emerged when the two forms ofgovernance (bureaucratic and heroic) merged together. A case could bemade. But equally we might ask if this is really such a signiﬁcant issue inthe ﬁrst place? If it is possible to have monarchs, aristocracies, slavery andextreme forms of patriarchal domination, even without a state (as itevidently was); and if it’s equally possible to maintain complex irrigationsystems, or develop science and abstract philosophy without a state (as italso appears to be), then what do we actually learn about human history byestablishing that one political entity is what we would like to describe as a‘state’ and another isn’t? Are there not more interesting and importantquestions we could be asking?
In this chapter we are going to explore the possibility that there are. Whatwould history look like if – instead of assuming that there must be somedeep internal resemblance between the governments of, say, ancient Egyptand modern Britain, and our task is therefore to ﬁgure out precisely what itis – we were to look at the whole problem with new eyes. There is no doubt that, in most of the areas that saw the rise of cities, powerful kingdoms andempires also eventually emerged. What did they have in common? Didthey, in fact, have anything in common? What does their appearance reallytell us about the history of human freedom and equality, or its loss? In whatway, if any, do they mark a fundamental break with what came before? 
IN WHICH WE LAY OUT A THEORY CONCERNING THE THREE ELEMENTARY FORMS OF DOMINATION, AND BEGINTO EXPLORE ITS IMPLICATIONS FOR HUMAN HISTORY 
The best way to go about this task, we suggest, is by returning to ﬁrstprinciples. We have already talked about fundamental, even primary, formsof freedom: the freedom to move; the freedom to disobey orders; thefreedom to reorganize social relations. Can we speak similarly aboutelementary forms of domination?
Recall how Rousseau, in his famous thought experiment, felt thateverything went back to private property, and especially property in land: inthat terrible moment when a man ﬁrst threw up a barrier and said, ‘Thisterritory is mine, and mine alone’, all subsequent forms of domination – andtherefore, all subsequent catastrophes – became inevitable. As we’ve seen,this obsession with property rights as the basis of society, and as afoundation of social power, is a peculiarly Western phenomenon – indeed, if‘the West’ has any real meaning, it would probably refer to that legal andintellectual tradition which conceives society in those terms. So, to begin athought experiment of a slightly different kind, it might be good to startright here. What are we really saying when we say that the power of afeudal aristocracy, or a landed gentry, or absentee landlords is ‘based onland’? 
Often we use such language as a way of cutting through airy abstractionsor high-minded pretensions to address simple material realities. Forexample, the two dominant political parties in nineteenth-century England,the Whigs and the Tories, liked to represent themselves as arguing aboutideas: a certain conception of free-market liberalism versus a certain notionof tradition. An historical materialist might object that, in fact, Whigsrepresented the interests of the commercial classes, and the Tories those ofthe landowners. They are of course right. It would be foolhardy to deny it.What we might question, however, is the premise that ‘landed’ (or any other form of) property is itself particularly material. Yes: soil, stones, grass,hedges, farm buildings and granaries are all material things; but when onespeaks of ‘landed property’ what one is really talking about is anindividual’s claim to exclusive access and control over all the soil, stones,grass, hedges, etc. within a speciﬁc territory. In practice, this means a legalright to keep anyone else off it. Land is only really ‘yours’, in this sense, ifno one would think to challenge your claim over it, or if you have thecapacity to summon at will people with weapons to threaten or attackanyone who disagrees, or just enters without permission and refuses toleave. Even if you shoot the trespassers yourself, you still need others toagree you were within your rights to do so. In other words, ‘landedproperty’ is not actual soil, rocks or grass. It is a legal understanding,maintained by a subtle mix of morality and the threat of violence. In fact,land ownership illustrates perfectly the logic of what Rudolf von Iheringcalled the state’s monopoly of violence within a territory – just within amuch smaller territory than a nation state.
All this might sound a little abstract, but it is a simple description of whathappens in reality, as any reader who has ever tried to squat a piece of land,occupy a building or for that matter overthrow a government will be keenlyaware. Ultimately, everyone knows it all comes down to whether someonewill eventually be given orders to remove you by force, and if it does, theneverything comes down to whether that someone is actually willing tofollow orders. Revolutions are rarely won in open combat. Whenrevolutionaries win, it’s usually because the bulk of those sent to crush themrefuse to shoot, or just go home.
So does that mean property, like political power, ultimately derives (asChairman Mao so delicately put it) ‘from the barrel of a gun’ – or, at best,from the ability to command the loyalties of those trained to use them?
No. Or not exactly.
To illustrate why not, and continue our thought experiment, let’s take adifferent sort of property. Consider a diamond necklace. If Kim Kardashianwalks down the street in Paris wearing a diamond necklace worth millionsof dollars, she is not only showing off her wealth, she is also ﬂaunting herpower over violence, since everyone assumes she would not be able to doso without the existence, visible or not, of an armed personal security detail,trained to deal with potential thieves. Property rights of all sorts areultimately backed up by what legal theorists like von Ihering euphemistically called ‘force’. But let us imagine, for a moment, whatwould happen if everyone on earth were suddenly to become physicallyinvulnerable. Say they all drank a potion which made it impossible foranyone to harm anyone else. Could Kim Kardashian still maintain exclusiverights over her jewellery?
Well, perhaps not if she showed it off too regularly, since someone wouldpresumably snatch it; but she certainly could if she normally kept it hiddenin a safe, the combination of which she alone knew and only revealed totrusted audiences at events which were not announced in advance. So there is a second way of ensuring that one has access to rights others do not have:the control of information. Only Kim and her closest conﬁdants knowwhere the diamonds are normally kept, or when she is likely to appearwearing them. This obviously applies to all forms of property that areultimately backed up by the ‘threat of force’ – landed property, wares instores, and so forth. If humans were incapable of hurting each other, no onewould be able to declare something absolutely sacred to themselves or todefend it against ‘all the world’. They could only exclude those who agreedto be excluded. 
Still, let us take the experiment a step further and imagine everyone onearth drank another potion which rendered them all incapable of keeping asecret, but still unable to harm one another physically as well. Access toinformation, as well as force, has now been equalized. Can Kim still keepher diamonds? Possibly. But only if she manages to convince absolutelyeveryone that, being Kim Kardashian, she is such a unique andextraordinary human being that she actually deserves to have things no oneelse can. 
We would like to suggest that these three principles – call them control ofviolence, control of information, and individual charisma – are also thethree possible bases of social power.2 The threat of violence tends to be the most dependable, which is why it has become the basis for uniform systemsof law everywhere; charisma tends to be the most ephemeral. Usually, allthree coexist to some degree. Even in societies where interpersonal violenceis rare, one may well ﬁnd hierarchies based on knowledge. It doesn’t evenparticularly matter what that knowledge is about: maybe some sort oftechnical know-how (say, of smelting copper, or using herbal medicines); ormaybe something we consider total mumbo jumbo (the names of the twenty-seven hells and thirty-nine heavens, and what creatures one wouldbe likely to meet if one travelled there).
Today, it is quite commonplace – for instance, in parts of Africa andPapua New Guinea – to ﬁnd initiation ceremonies that are so complex as torequire bureaucratic management, where initiates are gradually introducedto higher and higher levels of arcane knowledge, in societies where thereare otherwise no formal ranks of any sort. Even where such hierarchies ofknowledge do not exist, there will obviously always be individualdifferences. Some people will be considered more charming, funny,intelligent or physically attractive than others. This will always make somesort of difference, even within groups that develop elaborate safeguards toensure that it doesn’t (as, for instance, with the ritual mockery of successfulhunters among ‘egalitarian’ foragers like the Hadza).
As we’ve noted, an egalitarian ethos can take one of two directions: itcan either deny such individual quirks entirely, and insist that people are (orat least should be) treated as if they were exactly the same; or it cancelebrate their quirks in such a way as to imply that everyone is soprofoundly different that any overall ranking would be inconceivable.(After all, how do you measure the best ﬁsherman against the mostdigniﬁed elder, against the person who tells the funniest jokes, and so on?).In such cases, it might happen that certain ‘extreme individuals’ – if wemay call them that – do gain an outstanding, even leadership role. Here wemight think of Nuer prophets, or certain Amazonian shamans, Malagasy mpomasy or astrologer-magicians, or for that matter the ‘rich’ burials of theUpper Palaeolithic, which so often focus on individuals with strikinglyanomalous physical (and probably other) attributes. As those examplesimply, however, such characters are so highly unusual that it would bedifﬁcult to turn their authority into any sort of ongoing power.
What really concerns us about these three principles is that each hasbecome the basis for institutions now seen as foundational to the modern state. In the case of control over violence, this is obvious. Modern states are‘sovereign’: they hold the power once held by kings, which in practicetranslates into von Ihering’s monopoly on the legitimate use of coerciveforce within their territory. In theory, a true sovereign exercised a powerthat was above and beyond the law. Ancient kings were rarely able toenforce this power systematically (often, as we’ve seen, their supposedlyabsolute power really just meant they were the only people who could mete out arbitrary violence within about 100 yards of where they were standingor sitting at any given time). In modern states, the very same kind of poweris multiplied a thousand times because it is combined with the secondprinciple: bureaucracy. As Weber, the great sociologist of bureaucracy,observed long ago, administrative organizations are always based not juston control of information, but also on ‘ofﬁcial secrets’ of one sort oranother. This is why the secret agent has become the mythic symbol of themodern state. James Bond, with his licence to kill, combines charisma,secrecy and the power to use unaccountable violence, underpinned by agreat bureaucratic machine.
The combination of sovereignty with sophisticated administrativetechniques for storing and tabulating information introduces all sorts ofthreats to individual freedom – it makes possible surveillance states andtotalitarian regimes – but this danger, we are always assured, is offset by athird principle: democracy. Modern states are democratic, or at least it’sgenerally felt they really should be. Yet democracy, in modern states, isconceived very differently to, say, the workings of an assembly in anancient city, which collectively deliberated on common problems. Rather,democracy as we have come to know it is effectively a game of winners andlosers played out among larger-than-life individuals, with the rest of usreduced largely to onlookers.
If we are seeking an ancient precedent to this aspect of moderndemocracy, we shouldn’t turn to the assemblies of Athens, Syracuse orCorinth, but instead – paradoxically – to aristocratic contests of ‘heroicages’, such as those described in the Iliad with its endless agons: races,duels, games, gifts and sacriﬁces. As we noted in Chapter Nine, the politicalphilosophers of later Greek cities did not actually consider elections ademocratic way of selecting candidates for public ofﬁce at all. Thedemocratic method was sortition, or lottery, much like modern jury duty.Elections were assumed to belong to the aristocratic mode (aristocracymeaning ‘rule of the best’), allowing commoners – much like the retainersin an old-fashioned, heroic aristocracy – to decide who among the well bornshould be considered best of all; and well born, in this context, simplymeant all those who could afford to spend much of their time playing atpolitics.3 

Just as access to violence, information and charisma deﬁnes the verypossibilities of social domination, so the modern state is deﬁned as a combination of sovereignty, bureaucracy and a competitive political ﬁeld.4 
It seems only natural, then, that we should examine history in this light too;but as soon as we try to do so, we realize there is no actual reason whythese three principles should go together, let alone reinforce each other inthe precise fashion we have come to expect from governments today. Forone thing, the three elementary forms of domination have entirely separatehistorical origins. We’ve already seen this in ancient Mesopotamia, whereinitially the bureaucratic-commercial societies of the river valleys existed intension with the heroic polities of the hills and their endless pettyprincelings, vying for the loyalty of retainers through spectacular contestsof one sort or another; while the hill people, in turn, rejected the veryprinciple of administration.
Nor is there any compelling evidence that ancient Mesopotamian cities,even when ruled by royal dynasties, achieved any measure of real territorialsovereignty, so we are still a long way here from anything like anembryonic version of the modern state.5 In other words, they simplyweren’t states in von Ihering’s sense of the term; and even if they had been,it makes little sense to deﬁne a state simply in terms of sovereignty. Recallthe example of the Natchez of Louisiana, whose Great Sun wieldedabsolute power within his own (rather small) Great Village, where he couldorder summary executions and appropriate goods pretty much as he had amind to, but whose subjects largely ignored him when he wasn’t around.The divine kingship of the Shilluk, a Nilotic people of East Africa, workedon similar lines: there were very few limits on what the king could do tothose in his physical presence, but there was also nothing remotelyresembling an administrative apparatus to translate his sovereign power intosomething more stable or extensive: no tax system, no system to enforceroyal orders, or even report on whether or not they had been obeyed.
As we can now begin to see, modern states are, in fact, an amalgam ofelements that happen to have come together at a certain point in humanhistory – and, arguably, are now in the process of coming apart again(consider, for instance, how we currently have planetary bureaucracies,such as the WTO or IMF, with no corresponding principle of globalsovereignty). When historians, philosophers or political scientists argueabout the origin of the state in ancient Peru or China, what they are reallydoing is projecting that rather unusual constellation of elements backwards:typically, by trying to ﬁnd a moment when something like sovereign power came together with something like an administrative system (thecompetitive political ﬁeld is usually considered somewhat optional). Whatinterests them is precisely how and why these elements came together in theﬁrst place.
For instance, a standard story of human political evolution told by earliergenerations of scholars was that states arose from the need to managecomplex irrigation systems, or perhaps just large concentrations of peopleand information. This gave rise to top-down power, which in turn came tobe tempered, eventually, by democratic institutions. That would imply asequence of development somewhat like this: 

As we showed in Chapter Eight, contemporary evidence from ancientEurasia now points to a different pattern, where urban administrativesystems inspire a cultural counter-reaction (a further example ofschismogenesis), in the form of squabbling highland princedoms(‘barbarians’, from the perspective of the city dwellers),6 which eventuallyleads to some of those princes establishing themselves in cities andsystematizing their power: 

This may well have happened in some cases – Mesopotamia, for example –but it seems unlikely to be the only way in which such developments mightculminate in something that (to us at least) resembles a state. In other placesand times – often in moments of crisis – the process may begin with theelevation to pre-eminent roles of charismatic individuals who inspire theirfollowers to make a radical break with the past. Eventually, suchﬁgureheads assume a kind of absolute, cosmic authority, which is ﬁnallytranslated into a system of bureaucratic roles and ofﬁces.7 The path thenmight look more like this: 

What we are challenging here is not any particular formulation, but theunderlying teleology. All these accounts seem to assume that there is only one possible end point to this process: that these various types ofdomination were somehow bound to come together, sooner or later, insomething like the particular form taken by modern nation states inAmerica and France at the end of the eighteenth century, a form which wasgradually imposed on the rest of the world after both world wars.
What if this wasn’t true? 
What we are going to do here is to see what happens if we approach thehistory of some of the world’s ﬁrst kingdoms and empires without any suchpreconceptions. Along with the origins of the state, we will also be puttingaside such similarly vague and teleological notions as the ‘birth ofcivilization’ or the ‘rise of social complexity’ in order to take a closer lookat what actually happened. How did large-scale forms of domination ﬁrstemerge, and what did they actually look like? What, if anything, do theyhave to do with arrangements that endure to this day?
Let’s start by examining those few cases in the pre-Columbian Americaswhich even the greatest sticklers for deﬁnition tend to agree were ‘states’ ofsome kind. 
ON AZTECS, INCA AND MAYA (AND THEN ALSO SPANIARDS) 
The general consensus is that there were only two unambiguous ‘states’ inthe Americas at the time of the Spanish conquest: the Aztecs and the Inca.Of course, that is not how the Spanish would have referred to them. HernánCortés, in his letters and communications, wrote of cities, kingdoms andoccasionally republics. He hesitated to refer to the Aztec ruler, Moctezuma,as an ‘emperor’ – presumably so as not to risk rufﬂing the feathers of hisown lord, the ‘most Catholic emperor Charles V’. But it would never haveoccurred to him to ponder whether any of these kingdoms or cities qualiﬁedas ‘states’, since the concept barely existed at the time. Nonetheless, this isthe question which has preoccupied modern scholars, so let us considereach of these polities in turn.
We will begin with an anecdote, recorded in a Spanish source not longafter the conquista, about the raising of children in the Aztec capital ofTenochtitlan, shortly before it fell to Spanish forces: ‘at birth boys weregiven a shield with four arrows. The midwife prayed that they might becourageous warriors. They were presented four times to the sun and told of the uncertainties of life and the need to go to war. Girls, on the other hand,were given spindles and shuttles as a symbol of their future dedication tohomely tasks.’8 It is hard to say how widespread this practice was, but itpoints to something fundamental in Aztec society. Women still occupiedimportant positions in Tenochtitlan as merchants, doctors and priestesses;but they were excluded from an ascendant class of aristocrats whose powerwas based on warfare, predation and tribute. How far back this erosion offemale political power went among the Aztecs is unclear (certain lines ofevidence, such as the obligation for high-ranking advisors at court to takeon the cultic role of Cihuacóatl – or ‘Snake Woman’ – suggest not far atall). What we do know is that masculinity, often expressed through sexualviolence, became part of the dynamics of imperial expansion.9 Indeed, therape and enslavement of conquered women were among the primarygrievances reported to Cortés and his men by Aztec subjects in Veracruz,10 
who by 1519 were willing to take their chances with a band of unknownSpanish freebooters.
Male nobility among the Aztecs or Mexica seem to have viewed life asan eternal contest, or even conquest – a cultural tendency which they tracedback to their origins as an itinerant community of warriors and colonizers.Theirs seems to have been a ‘capturing society’ not unlike some of theother, more recent Amerindian societies we’ve explored, but on an inﬁnitelygreater scale. Enemies taken in war were kept, nurtured to ensure theirvitality – sometimes in luxurious circumstances – but then ﬁnally killed byritual specialists to repay a primordial debt of life to the gods, andpresumably for any number of other reasons too. At Tenochtitlan’s TemploMayor the result was a veritable industry of pious bloodletting, which someSpanish observers took as clear proof that the Aztec ruling classes were inleague with Satan.11 

This is how the Aztecs attempted to impress their neighbours, and it isstill how they impress themselves on the human imagination today: theimage of thousands of prisoners, waiting in line to have their hearts torn outby masked god-impersonators, is, admittedly, difﬁcult to get out of one’shead. In other respects, however, the sixteenth-century Aztecs seemed to theSpaniards to present a rather familiar picture of human government;certainly, more familiar than anything they encountered in the Caribbean orin the swamps and savannahs of Yucatán. Monarchy, ranks of ofﬁcialdom,military cadres and organized religion (however ‘demonic’) were all highly developed. Urban planning in the Valley of Mexico, as some Spaniardsremarked, seemed superior to what was found in their Castilian cities backhome. Sumptuary laws, no less elaborate than in Spain, kept a respectabledistance between governing and governed, dictating everything fromfashion to sexual mores. Tribute and taxation were overseen by calpixquewho, appointed from among the ranks of commoners, were unable to turntheir knowledge of administration into political power (a preserve ofnoblemen and warriors). In the conquered territories local nobles were keptin place, obedience being assured by a patronage system that tied them tosponsors at the Aztec court. Here too the Spaniards found resonance withtheir practice of aeque principali, which granted autonomy to newlyacquired territories so long as their local headmen supplied annual tithes tothe Crown.12 

Like the Spanish Habsburgs, who became their overlords, the Aztecwarrior aristocracy had risen from relatively humble origins to create one ofthe world’s largest empires. Even their Triple Alliance paled, however,when compared with what the conquistadors found in the Peruvian Andes. 
In Spain, as in much of Eurasia, mountains offered refuge from the coercivepower of kings and emperors; rebels, bandits and heretics hid out in thehighlands. But in Inca Peru, everything seemed to work the other wayround. Mountains formed the backbone of imperial power. This upside-down (to European eyes) political world, conceived atop the AndeanCordillera, was the super-kingdom of Tawantinsuyu, meaning ‘quartersclosely bound’.13 

More precisely, Tawantinsuyu refers to the four suyus or majoradministrative units of the Sapa Inca’s domain. From their capital at Cuzco,where it was said even grass was made of gold, Inca of royal bloodextracted periodic mit’a – a rotating labour tribute, or corvée – from somemillions of subjects distributed across the western littoral of South America,from Quito to Santiago.14 Exercising a degree of sovereignty over eightycontiguous provinces and countless ethnic groups, by the end of theﬁfteenth century the Inca had achieved something like the ‘universalmonarchy’ (monarchia universalis) that the Habsburgs, rulers of numerousscattered territories, could only conjure in their dreams. Nevertheless, ifTawantinsuyu is to be considered a state, it was still very much a state information. 
Just as the popular image of the Aztecs turns on mass carnage, popularimages of the Inca tend to portray them as master administrators: as we’veseen, Enlightenment thinkers like Madame de Grafﬁgny and her readersformed their ﬁrst impression of what a welfare state, or even statesocialism, might be like by contemplating accounts of the empire in theAndes. In reality, Inca efﬁciency was decidedly uneven. The empire, afterall, was over 2,500 miles long. In villages at any appreciable distance fromCuzco, Chan Chan or other centres of royal power, the imperial apparatusmade, at best, a sporadic appearance and many villages remained largelyself-governing. Chroniclers and ofﬁcials like Juan Polo de Ondegardo yZárate were intrigued to discover that while typical Andean villages didindeed have a complex administrative apparatus, that apparatus appeared tobe entirely home-grown, based on collective associations called ayllu. In order to accommodate imperial demands for tribute or corvée labour, localcommunities had merely tweaked these collectives slightly.15 

The imperial centre of the Inca Empire forms a stark contrast with that ofthe Aztec. Moctezuma, despite his grandeur (his palace containedeverything from an aviary to quarters for troupes of comic dwarfs), wasofﬁcially just the tlatoani or ‘ﬁrst speaker’ in a council of aristocrats, andhis empire ofﬁcially a Triple Alliance of three cities. For all the bloodthirstyspectacle, the Aztec Empire was really a confederation of noble families.Indeed, the spectacle itself seems to have been at least partly rooted in thesame spirit of aristocratic one-upmanship that spurred Aztec nobles tocompete in public ball games, or for that matter philosophical debate. TheInca, in contrast, insisted their sovereign was himself the incarnate Sun. Allauthority derived from a single point of radiance – the person of Sapa Inca(Unique Inca) himself – cascading downwards through ranks of royalsiblings. The Inca court was an incubator, a hothouse for sovereignty.Compressed within its walls were not only the household of the living kingand his sister, who was also his Coya (queen), but also the administrativeheads, chief priests and imperial guard of the kingdom, most of them bloodrelatives of the king.
Being a god, the Sapa Inca never really died. The bodies of former kingswere preserved, wrapped and mummiﬁed, much like the pharaohs ofancient Egypt; like the pharaohs, too, they held court from beyond thegrave, receiving regular offerings of food and clothing from their formerrural estates – though unlike the mummiﬁed bodies of Egyptian pharaohs, which at least remained conﬁned to their tombs, their Peruvian equivalentswere wheeled out to attend public events and sponsored festivals.16 (Onereason why each new ruler was obliged to expand the empire was preciselythis: they only inherited the old ruler’s army. His court, lands and retainersremained in the dead Inca’s hands.) This extraordinary concentration ofpower around the Inca’s own body had a ﬂip side: royal authority wasextremely difﬁcult to delegate.
The most important ofﬁcials were ‘honorary Inca’ who, while notdirectly related to the sovereign, were allowed to wear the same earornaments and were otherwise seen as an extension of his personage. Statuedoubles or other substitutes might also be employed – there was anelaborate ritual protocol surrounding these – but to do anything important,the Sapa Inca’s personal presence was required, meaning the court wascontinually on the move, with the royal person being regularly carriedthrough the ‘four quarters’ in a litter lined with silver and feathers. This, asmuch as the need to carry armies and supplies, required enormousinvestment in road systems, converting one of the world’s most complexand rugged terrains into a continuous network of well-maintained highwaysand stepped paths, punctuated by shrines (huacas) and way stations,stocked and staffed from the royal coffers.17 It was on one such annual tour, far from the walls of Cuzco, that the last Sapa Inca, Atahualpa, wasabducted by Pizarro’s men and subsequently killed.
As with the Aztecs, consolidation of the Inca’s empire seems to haveinvolved a great deal of sexual violence, and resulting changes in genderroles. In this case, what began as a customary system of marriage became atemplate for class domination. Traditionally, in those parts of the Andeswhere people were divided by social rank, women were expected to marryinto families of higher status than their own. In doing so the bride’s lineagewas said to be ‘conquered’ by the groom’s. What began as a kind of ritualﬁgure of speech seems to have been turned into something more literal andsystematic. In each newly conquered territory, the Inca immediately built atemple and forced a quota of local virgins to become ‘Brides of the Sun’:women cut off from their families, kept either as permanent virgins ordedicated to the Sapa Inca, for him to exploit and dispose of as he pleased.In consequence, the king’s subjects could be referred to collectively as‘conquered women’,18 and local nobles jockeyed for position by trying toplace their daughters in prominent roles at court. 
What, then, of the famous Inca administrative system? It did, certainly,exist. Records were kept largely in the form of knotted strings called khipu(or quipu), described in Pedro Cieza de León’s Crónica del Perú (1553): 
In each provincial center they had accountants who were called
‘knot-keepers/orderers’ [khipukamayuqs], and by means of these
knots they kept the record and account of what had been given in
tribute by those [people] in that district, from the silver, gold,
clothing, herd animals, to the wool and other things down to the
smallest items, and by the same knots they commissioned a record
of what was given over one year, or ten or twenty years and they
kept the accounts so well that they did not lose a pair of sandals.19 

Spanish chroniclers provided few details, however, and after the use ofkhipu was ofﬁcially banned in 1583, local specialists had little incentive tocommit their lore to writing. We don’t know exactly how it worked,although new sources of information are still emerging from remote Andeancommunities, where it turns out Inca-style khipus and their associated forms of knowledge were kept in use until much more recent times.20 Scholars argue about whether khipu should be considered a form of writing. Whatsources we do have mainly describe the numerical system, noting thehierarchical arrangement of colour-coded knots into decimal units, from 1to 10,000; but it seems the most elaborate string bundles encoded records oftopography and genealogy, and most likely also narratives and songs.21 

In many ways, these two great polities – Aztec and Inca – were idealtargets for conquest. Both were organized around easily identiﬁablecapitals, inhabited by easily identiﬁable kings who could be captured orkilled, and surrounded by peoples who were either long accustomed toobeying orders or, if they had any inclination to shrug off power from thecentre, were likely to do so precisely by joining forces with would-beconquistadors. If an empire is based largely on military force, it is relativelyeasy for a superior force of the same kind to seize control of its territory,since if one takes control of that centre – as Cortés did by laying siege toTenochtitlan in 1521, or Pizarro by seizing Atahualpa at Cajamarca in 1532
– everything else falls readily into place. There might be stubbornresistance (the siege of Tenochtitlan took over a year of gruelling house-to.house ﬁghting) but, once it was over, the conquerors could take over many of the mechanisms of rule that already existed and start conveying orders tosubjects schooled in obedience.
Where there are no such powerful kingdoms – either because they hadnever existed, as in much of North America or Amazonia, or because apopulation had consciously rejected central government – things could getdecidedly trickier.
A good example of such decentralization is the territory inhabited byspeakers of the various Maya languages: the Yucatán Peninsula and thehighlands of Guatemala and Chiapas to its south.22 At the time of the initial Spanish incursion, the region was divided into what seemed to thesettlers an endless succession of tiny principalities, townships, villages andseasonal hamlets. Conquest was a long and laborious business, and nosooner was it completed (or at least, no sooner had the Spanish decided itwas completed),23 than the new authorities faced an apparently endlessseries of popular revolts.
As early as 1546, a coalition of Maya rebels rose up against Spanishsettlers and, despite brutal reprisals, resistance never really died down.Prophetic movements brought a second major wave of insurrections in theeighteenth century; and in 1848, a mass rising almost drove the settlers’descendants out of Yucatán entirely, until the siege of their capital, atMérida, was interrupted by the planting season. The resulting ‘Caste War’,as it was called, continued for generations. There were still rebels holdingout in parts of Quintana Roo at the time of the Mexican Revolution in thesecond decade of the twentieth century; indeed, you could argue that thesame rebellion continues, in another form, with the Zapatista movementthat controls large parts of Chiapas today. As the Zapatistas also show, itwas in these territories, where no major state or empire had existed forcenturies, that women came most prominently to the fore in anti-colonialstruggles, both as organizers of armed resistance and as defenders ofindigenous tradition.
Now, this anti-authoritarian streak might come as something of a surpriseto those who know the Maya as one of a triumvirate of New Worldcivilizations – Aztecs, Maya, Inca – familiar from books on art history.Much of the art from what’s called the Classic Maya period, roughly AD 150–900, is exquisitely beautiful. Most derives from cities that once existedin what are now the tangled rainforests of Petén. On ﬁrst appraisal, theMaya in this period seem to have been organized into kingdoms much like those of the Andes or central Mexico, only smaller; but then our picture,until quite recently, was dominated by sculpted monuments and glyphicinscriptions commissioned by the ruling elites themselves.24 These focus,predictably enough, on the deeds of great rulers (holders of the title ajaw),especially their conquests, as alliances of independent city-states vied forhegemony over the lowlands under the leadership of two rival dynasties –those of Tikal and the ‘snake kings’ of Calakmul.25 

These monuments tell us a great deal about the rituals such rulersconducted to commune with their divinized ancestors26 – but precious littleabout what ordinary life was like for their subjects, let alone how thosesubjects felt about their rulers’ claims to cosmic power. If there wereprophetic movements or periodic insurrections during the Classic Mayaperiod, as there were in the colonial period, we would currently have fewways to know about them; although archaeological research may yet changethis picture. What we do know is that, in the ﬁnal centuries of the Classicperiod, women attain a new visibility in sculpture and inscription, appearingnot just as consorts, princesses and queen mothers but also as powerfulrulers and spirit mediums in their own right. We also know that at somepoint in the ninth century the Classic Maya political system came apart, andmost of the great cities were abandoned.
Archaeologists argue about what happened. Some theories assume thatpopular resistance – some combination of defection, mass movements oroutright rebellion – must have played a part, even if most areunderstandably reluctant to draw too ﬁrm a line between cause and consequence.27 It is signiﬁcant that one of the few urban societies whichendured, even grew, was located in the northern lowlands around the city ofChichén Itza. Here, kingship seems to have dramatically changed itscharacter, becoming a more purely ceremonial or even theatrical affair – sohedged about by ritual that any serious political intervention was no longerpossible – while day-to-day governance apparently passed largely into thehands of a coalition that formed among collectives of prominent warriorsand priests.28 Indeed, some of what were once assumed to be royal palacesin this ‘Post-Classic’ period are now being reinterpreted as assembly halls(popolna) for local representatives.29 

By the time the Spaniards arrived, six centuries after the collapse of citiesin Petén, Mayan societies were thoroughly decentralized, parsed into a bewildering variety of townships and principalities, many without kings.30 
The books of Chilam Balam, prophetic annals written down in the latesixteenth century, dwell endlessly on the disasters and miseries that befalloppressive rulers. In other words, there’s every reason to believe that thespirit of rebellion which has marked this particular region can be tracedback to at least the time of Charlemagne (the eighth century AD); and thatacross the centuries, overbearing Maya rulers were quite regularly andrepeatedly disposed of.
Undoubtedly, the Classic Maya artistic tradition is magniﬁcent, one ofthe greatest the world has ever seen. By comparison, artistic products fromthe ‘Post-Classic’ – as the period from roughly AD 900 to 1520 is known – often seem clumsy and less worthy of appreciation. On the other hand, howmany of us would really prefer to live under the arbitrary power of a pettywarlord who, for all his patronage of ﬁne arts, counts tearing the hearts outof living human bodies among his most signiﬁcant accomplishments? Ofcourse, history is not usually thought about in such terms, and it is worthasking why. Part of the reason is simply the designation ‘Post-Classic’,which suggests little more than an afterthought. It may seem a trivial issue –but it matters, because such habits of thought are one reason why periods ofrelative freedom and equality tend to get sidelined in the larger sweep ofhistory.
This is important: let’s look at it further, before we return to our threeforms of domination. 
IN WHICH WE OFFER A DIGRESSION ON ‘THE SHAPE OF TIME’,31 AND SPECIFICALLY HOW METAPHORS OF GROWTH AND DECAY INTRODUCE UNNOTICED POLITICAL BIASES INTO OUR VIEW OF HISTORY 
History and archaeology abound with terms like ‘post’ and ‘proto’,‘intermediate’ or even ‘terminal’. To some degree, these are products ofearly-twentieth-century cultural theory. Alfred Kroeber, a pre-eminentanthropologist of his day, spent decades on a research project aimed atdetermining if identiﬁable laws lie behind the rhythms and patterns ofcultural growth and decay: whether systematic relations could beestablished between artistic fashions, economic booms and busts, periods ofintellectual creativity and conservatism, and the expansion and collapse of empires. It was an intriguing question but, after many years, his ultimateconclusion was: no, there were no such laws. In his Conﬁgurations ofCultural Growth (1944) Kroeber examined the relation of the arts,philosophy, science and population across human history and found noevidence for any consistent pattern; nor has any such pattern beensuccessfully discerned in those few more recent studies which continue toplough the same furrow.32 

Despite this, when we write about the past today we almost invariablyorganize our thinking as if such patterns really did exist. Civilizations aretypically represented either as ﬂower-like – growing, blooming and thenshrivelling up – or else as like some grand building, painstakinglyconstructed but prone to sudden ‘collapse’. The latter term tends to be usedindiscriminately for situations like the Classic Maya collapse, which didindeed involve a rapid abandonment of some hundreds of settlements andthe disappearance of millions of people; but equally it’s used for the‘collapse’ of the Egyptian Old Kingdom, where the only thing that reallyseems to have declined precipitously is the power of Egypt’s elites rulingfrom the northern city of Memphis.
Even in the Maya case, to describe the entire period between AD 900 and 1520 as ‘Post-Classic’ is to suggest that the only really signiﬁcant thingabout it is the degree to which it can be seen as the waning of a GoldenAge. In a similar way, terms like ‘Proto-palatial Crete’, ‘Predynastic Egypt’or ‘Formative Peru’ convey a sense of impatience, as if Minoans, Egyptiansor Andean peoples spent centuries doing little but laying the groundworkfor such a Golden Age – and, it is implied, for strong, stable government –to come about.33 We’ve already seen how this played out in Uruk, where atleast seven centuries of collective self-rule (also termed ‘Predynastic’ inearlier scholarship) comes to be written off as a mere prelude to the ‘real’history of Mesopotamia – which is then presented as a history ofconquerors, dynasts, lawgivers and kings.
Some periods are dismissed as prefaces, others as postfaces. Still othersbecome ‘intermediary’. The ancient Andes and Mesoamerica are cases inpoint, but probably the most familiar – and the most striking – example isagain that of Egypt. Museumgoers will no doubt be familiar with thedivision of ancient Egyptian history into Old, Middle and New Kingdoms.Each is separated by an ‘intermediate’ period, often described as epochs of‘chaos and cultural degeneration’. In fact, these were simply periods when there was no single ruler of Egypt. Authority devolved to local factions or,as we will shortly see, changed its nature altogether. Taken together, theseintermediate periods span about a third of Egypt’s ancient history, down tothe accession of a series of foreign or vassal kings (known simply as theLate period), and they saw some very signiﬁcant political developments oftheir own. 
To take just one example, at Thebes between 754 and 525 BC – spanningthe Third Intermediate and Late periods – a series of ﬁve unmarried,childless princesses (of Libyan and Nubian descent) were elevated to theposition of ‘god’s wife of Amun’, a title and role which acquired not justsupreme religious, but also great economic and political weight at this time.In ofﬁcial representations, these women are given ‘throne names’ framed bycartouches, just like kings, and appear leading royal festivals and makingofferings to the gods.34 They also owned some of the richest estates inEgypt, including extensive lands and a large staff of priests and scribes. Tohave a situation in which women not only command power on such a scale,but in which this power is linked to an ofﬁce reserved explicitly for singlewomen, is historically unusual. Yet this political innovation is littlediscussed, partly because it is already framed within an ‘intermediate’ or‘late’ period that signals its transitory (or even decadent) nature.35 

One might assume the division into Old, Middle and New Kingdoms isitself very ancient, perhaps going back thousands of years to Greek sourceslike the third-century BC Aegyptiaca, composed by Egyptian chroniclerManetho, or even to the hieroglyphic records themselves. Not so. In fact,the tripartite division only began to be proposed by modern Egyptologists inthe late nineteenth century, and the terms they introduced (initially ‘Reich’or ‘empire’, later ‘kingdom’) were explicitly modelled on European nationstates. German, particularly Prussian, scholars played a leading role here.Their tendency to perceive ancient Egypt’s past as a series of cyclicalalternations between unity and disintegration clearly echoes the politicalconcerns of Bismarck’s Germany, where an authoritarian government wastrying to assemble a uniﬁed nation state from an endless variety of tinystatelets. After the First World War, as Europe’s own regime of oldmonarchies was coming apart, prominent Egyptologists such as AdolfErman granted the ‘Intermediate’ periods their own place in history,drawing comparisons between the end of the Old Kingdom and theBolshevik Revolution of their own time.36 

With hindsight, it’s easy to see just how much these chronologicalschemes reﬂect their authors’ political concerns. Or even, perhaps, atendency – when casting their minds back in time – to imagine themselveseither as part of the ruling elite, or as having roles somewhat analogous toones they had in their own societies: the Egyptian or Maya equivalents ofmuseum curators, professors and middle-range functionaries. But why,then, have these schemes become effectively canonical?
Consider the Middle Kingdom (2055–1650 BC), represented in standardhistories as a time when Egypt moved from the supposed chaos of the FirstIntermediate period into a renewed phase of strong and stable government,bringing with it an artistic and literary renaissance.37 Even if we set aside the question of just how chaotic the ‘intermediate period’ really was (we’llget to that soon), the Middle Kingdom could equally well be represented asa period of violent disputes over royal succession, crippling taxation, state-sponsored suppression of ethnic minorities, and the growth of forced labourto support royal mining expeditions and construction projects – not tomention the brutal plundering of Egypt’s southern neighbours for slaves andgold. However much future Egyptologists would come to appreciate them,the elegance of Middle Kingdom literature like The Story of Sinuhe and the proliferation of Osiris cults likely offered little solace to the thousands ofmilitary conscripts, forced labourers and persecuted minorities of the time,many of whose grandparents were living quite peaceful lives in thepreceding ‘dark ages’.
What is true of time, incidentally, is also true of space. For the last 5,000years of human history – i.e. roughly the span of time we will be movingaround in, over the course of this chapter – our conventional vision of worldhistory is a chequerboard of cities, empires and kingdoms; but in fact, formost of this period these were exceptional islands of political hierarchy,surrounded by much larger territories whose inhabitants, if visible at all tohistorians’ eyes, are variously described as ‘tribal confederacies’,‘amphictyonies’ or (if you’re an anthropologist) ‘segmentary societies’ –that is, people who systematically avoided ﬁxed, overarching systems ofauthority. We know a bit about how such societies worked in parts ofAfrica, North America, Central or Southeast Asia and other regions wheresuch loose and ﬂexible political associations existed into recent times, butwe know frustratingly little of how they operated in periods when thesewere by far the world’s most common forms of government. 
A truly radical account, perhaps, would retell human history from theperspective of the times and places in between. In that sense, this chapter isnot truly radical: for the most part, we are telling the same old story; but weare at least trying to see what happens when we drop the teleological habitof thought, which makes us scour the ancient world for embryonic versionsof our modern nation states. We are considering, instead, the possibility that
– when looking at those times and places usually taken to mark ‘the birth ofthe state’ – we may in fact be seeing how very different kinds of powercrystallize, each with its own peculiar mix of violence, knowledge andcharisma: our three elementary forms of domination.
One way to test the value of a new approach is to see if it helps usexplain what had previously seemed anomalous cases: that is, ancientpolities which undeniably mobilized and organized enormous numbers ofpeople, but which don’t seem to ﬁt any of the usual deﬁnitions of a state.Certainly, there are plenty of these. Let’s start with the Olmec, generallyseen as the ﬁrst great Mesoamerican civilization. 
ON POLITICS AS SPORT: THE OLMEC CASE 
How precisely to describe the Olmec has proved a difﬁcult problem forarchaeologists to grapple with. Early-twentieth-century scholars referred tothem as an artistic or cultural ‘horizon’, largely because it wasn’t clear howelse to describe a style – easily identiﬁable by certain common types ofpottery, anthropomorphic ﬁgurines and stone sculpture – that seemed to popup between 1500 and 1000 BC across an enormous area, straddling theIsthmus of Tehuantepec and including Guatemala, Honduras and much ofsouthern Mexico, but whose meaning was otherwise uncertain. Whateverthe Olmec were, they seemed to represent the ‘mother culture’, as it came tobe known, of all later Mesoamerican civilizations, having invented theregion’s characteristic calendar systems, glyphic writing and even ball games.38 

At the same time, there was no reason to assume the Olmec were auniﬁed ethnic or even political group. There was much speculation aboutwandering missionaries, trading empires, elite fashion styles and much elsebesides. Eventually, archaeologists came to understand that there was, infact, an Olmec heartland in the marshlands of Veracruz, where the swampcities of San Lorenzo and La Venta arose along the fringes of Mexico’s Gulf Coast. The internal structure of these Olmec cities is still poorly understood.Most seem to have been centred on ceremonial precincts – of uncertainlayout, but including large earthen pyramid mounds – surrounded byextensive suburbs. These monumental epicentres stand in relative isolation,amid an otherwise fragmented and relatively unstructured landscape ofsmall maize-farming settlements and seasonal forager camps.39 

What can we really say, then, about the structure of Olmec society? Weknow it was in no sense egalitarian; there were clearly marked elites. Thepyramids and other monuments suggest that, at least at certain times ofyear, these elites had extraordinary resources of skill and labour at theirdisposal. In every other respect, though, ties between centre and hinterlandappear to have been surprisingly superﬁcial. The collapse of the ﬁrst greatOlmec city at San Lorenzo, for instance, seems to have had very littleimpact on the wider regional economy.40 

Any further assessment of Olmec political structure has to reckon withwhat many consider its signature achievement: a series of absolutelycolossal sculpted heads. These remarkable objects are free-standing, carvedfrom tons of basalt, and of a quality comparable with the ﬁnest ancientEgyptian stonework. Each must have taken untold hours of grinding toproduce. These sculptures appear to be representations of Olmec leaders,but, intriguingly, they are depicted wearing the leather helmets of ballplayers. All the known examples are sufﬁciently similar that each seems toreﬂect some kind of standard ideal of male beauty; but, at the same time,each is also different enough to be seen as a unique portrait of a particular,individual champion.41 

No doubt there were also actual ball-courts – though these have provedsurprisingly elusive in the archaeological record – and while we obviouslydon’t know what kind of game was played, if they were anything like laterMaya and Aztec ball games it likely took place in a long and narrow court,with two teams from high-ranking families competing for fame and honourby striking a heavy rubber ball with the hips and buttocks. It seems bothreasonable and logical to conclude that there was a fairly direct relationshipbetween competitive games and the rise of an Olmec aristocracy.42 Without written evidence it’s hard to say much more, but looking a bit closer at laterMesoamerican ball games might at least give us a sense of how this workedin practice. 
Stone ball-courts were common features of Classic Maya cities,alongside royal residences and pyramid-temples. Some were purelyceremonial; others were actually used for sport. The chief Maya gods werethemselves ball players. In the K’iche Maya epic Popol Vuh a ball gameprovides the setting in which mortal heroes and underworld gods collide,leading to the birth of the Hero Twins Hunahpu and Xbalanque, who go onto beat the gods at their own deadly game and ascend to take their ownplace among the stars.
The fact that the greatest known Maya epic centres on a ball game givesus a sense of how central the sport was to Maya notions of charisma andauthority. So too, in a more visceral way, does an inscribed staircase built atYaxchilán to mark the accession (in AD 752) of what was probably its mostfamous king, known as Bird Jaguar the Great. On the central block heappears as a ball player. Flanked by two dwarf attendants, the king preparesto strike a huge rubber ball containing the body of a human captive –bound, broken and bundled – as it tumbles down a ﬂight of stairs. Capturinghigh-ranking enemies to be held for ransom or, failing payment, to be killedat ball games was a major objective of Maya warfare. This particularunfortunate ﬁgure may be a certain Jewelled Skull, a noble from a rival city,whose humiliation was so important to Bird Jaguar that he also made it thecentral feature of a carved lintel on a nearby temple.43 

In some parts of the Americas, competitive sports served as a substitutefor war. Among the Classic Maya, one was really an extension of the other.Battles and games formed part of an annual cycle of royal competitions,played for life and death. Both are recorded on Maya monuments as keyevents in the lives of rulers. Most likely, these elite games were also massspectacles, cultivating a particular sort of urban public – the sort thatrelishes gladiatorial contests, and thereby comes to understand politics interms of opposition. Centuries later, Spanish conquistadors described Aztecversions of the ball game played at Tenochtitlan, where players confrontedeach other amid racks of human skulls. They reported how recklesscommoners, carried away in the competitive fervour of the tournament,would sometimes lose all they had or even gamble themselves intoslavery.44 The stakes were so high that, should a player actually send a ballthrough one of the stone hoops adorning the side of the court (these weremade so small as to render it nearly impossible; normally the game waswon in other ways), the contest ended immediately, and the player who 
performed the miracle received all the goods wagered, as well as any othershe might care to pillage from the onlookers.45 

It is easy to see why the Olmec, with their intense fusion of politicalcompetition and organized spectacle, are nowadays seen as culturalprogenitors of later Mesoamerican kingdoms and empires; but there is littleevidence that the Olmec themselves ever created an infrastructure for dominating a large population. So far as anyone knows, their rulers did notcommand a stable military or administrative apparatus that might haveallowed them to extend their power throughout a wider hinterland. Instead,they presided over a remarkable spread of cultural inﬂuence radiating fromceremonial centres, which may only have been densely occupied on speciﬁcoccasions (such as ritual ball games) scheduled in concert with the demandsof the agricultural calendar, and largely empty at other times of year.
In other words, if these were ‘states’ in any sense at all, then they areprobably best deﬁned as seasonal versions of what Clifford Geertz oncecalled ‘theatre states’, where organized power was realized onlyperiodically, in grand but ﬂeeting spectacles. Anything we might consider‘statecraft’, from diplomacy to the stockpiling of resources, existed in orderto facilitate the rituals, rather than the other way round.46 

CHAVÍN DE HUÁNTAR – AN ‘EMPIRE’ BUILT ON IMAGES? 
In South America we ﬁnd a somewhat analogous situation. Before the Inca,a whole series of other societies are identiﬁed tentatively by scholars as‘states’ or ‘empires’. All these societies occur within the area latercontrolled by the Inca: the Peruvian Andes and adjacent coastal drainages.None used writing, at least in any form we can recognize. Still, from AD 600 onwards many did employ knotted strings for record-keeping, and probablyother forms of notation too. 
Monumental centres of some kind were already appearing in the RioSupe region in the third millennium BC.47 Later, between 1000 and 200 BC,a single centre – at Chavín de Huántar, in the northern highlands of Peru –extended its inﬂuence over a much larger area.48 This ‘Chavín horizon’ gave way to three distinct regional cultures. In the central highlands arose amilitarized polity known as Wari. In parallel, on the shores of Lake Titicaca,a metropolis called Tiwanaku – at 420 hectares, roughly twice the size ofUruk or Mohenjo-daro – took form, using an ingenious system of raised ﬁelds to grow its crops on the freezing heights of the Bolivian altiplano. On the north coast of Peru, a third culture, known as Moche, displaysstriking funerary evidence of female leadership: lavish tombs of warrior-priestesses and queens, drenched in gold and ﬂanked by human sacriﬁces.50 

The ﬁrst Europeans to study these civilizations, in the late nineteenth andearly twentieth centuries, assumed that any city or set of cities withmonumental art and architecture, exerting its ‘inﬂuence’ over a surroundingregion, must be the capitals of states or empires (they also assumed – just aswrongly, it turns out – that all the rulers were male). As with the Olmec, asurprisingly large proportion of that inﬂuence seems to have come in theform of images – distributed, in the Andean case, on small ceramic vessels,objects of personal adornment and textiles – rather than in the spread ofadministrative, military or commercial institutions and their associatedtechnologies.
Consider Chavín de Huántar itself, located high in the Mosna valley ofthe Peruvian Andes. Archaeologists once believed it to have been the coreof a pre-Inca empire in the ﬁrst millennium BC: a state controlling ahinterland that stretched to the Amazonian rainforest to the east and the Paciﬁc Coast to the west, and included all the intervening highlands andcoastal drainages in between. Such power seemed commensurate with thescale and sophistication of Chavín’s cut-stone architecture, its unrivalledabundance of monumental sculpture, and the appearance of Chavín motifson pottery, jewellery and textiles across the wider region. But was Chavínreally some kind of ‘Rome of the Andes’?
In fact, little evidence has emerged since to suggest this. In order to get asense of what might really have been going on at Chavín we must lookmore closely at the sort of images we’re talking about, and what they tell usabout the wider importance of vision and knowledge in Chavín notions of power.
The art of Chavín is not made up of pictures, still less pictorial narratives
– at least, not in any intuitively recognizable sense. Neither does it appear tobe a pictographic writing system. This is one reason why we can be fairlycertain we are not dealing with an actual empire. Real empires tend tofavour styles of ﬁgural art that are both very large but also very simple, sotheir meaning can be easily understood by anyone they wish to impress. Ifan Achaemenid Persian emperor carved his likeness into the side of amountain, he did it in such a way that anyone, even an ambassador from lands as yet unknown to him (or an antiquarian of some remote future age),would be able to recognize that it is indeed the image of a very great king.
Chavín images, by contrast, are not for the uninitiated. Crested eaglescurl in on themselves, vanishing into a maze of ornament; human facesgrow snake-like fangs, or contort into a feline grimace. No doubt otherﬁgures escape our attention altogether. Only after some study do even themost elementary forms reveal themselves to the untrained eye. With dueattention, we can eventually begin to tease out recurrent images of tropicalforest animals – jaguars, snakes, caimans – but just as the eye attunes tothem they slip back from our ﬁeld of vision, winding in and out of eachother’s bodies or merging into complex patterns.51 

Some of these images are described by scholars as ‘monsters’, but theyhave nothing in common with the simple composite ﬁgures of ancientGreek vases or Mesopotamian sculpture – centaurs, grifﬁns and the like – ortheir Moche equivalents. We are in another kind of visual universealtogether. It is the realm of the shape-shifter, where no body is ever quitestable or complete, and diligent mental training is required to tease outstructure from what at ﬁrst seems to be visual mayhem. One reason why wecan say any of this with a degree of conﬁdence is because the arts of Chavínappear to be an early (and monumental) manifestation of a much widerAmerindian tradition, in which images are not meant to illustrate orrepresent, but instead serve as visual cues for extraordinary feats of memory.
Up until recent times, a great many indigenous societies were still usingsystems of broadly similar kinds to transmit esoteric knowledge of ritualformulae, genealogies or records of shamanic journeys to the world ofchthonic spirits and animal familiars.52 In Eurasia, similar techniques weredeveloped in the ancient ‘arts of memory’, where those trying to memorizestories, speeches, lists or similar material would each have a familiar‘memory palace’. This consisted of a mental pathway or room in which aseries of striking images could be arranged, each a cue to a particularepisode, incident or name. One can only imagine what might happen ifsomeone were to draw or carve one such set of visual cues, and a laterarchaeologist or art historian were to discover it, with no idea of thecontext, let alone what the story being memorized was actually about.
In the case of Chavín, we actually can be on fairly safe ground inassuming that these images were records of shamanic journeys; not just because of the peculiar nature of the images themselves, but also because ofa wealth of circumstantial evidence relating to altered states ofconsciousness. At Chavín itself, snuff spoons, small ornate mortars andbone pipes have been found; and among its carved images are sculptedmale ﬁgures with fangs and snake headdresses holding aloft the stalk of theSan Pedro cactus. This plant is the basis of Huachuma, a mescaline-basedinfusion still made in the region today which induces psychoactive visions.Other carved ﬁgures, all of them apparently male, are surrounded by imagesof vilca leaves (Anadenanthera sp.), which contain a powerfulhallucinogen. Released when the leaves are ground up and snorted, itinduces a gush of mucus from the nose, as faithfully depicted on sculptedheads that line the walls of Chavín’s major temples.53 

In fact, nothing in Chavín’s monumental landscape really seemsconcerned with secular government at all. There are no obvious militaryfortiﬁcations or administrative quarters. Almost everything, on the otherhand, seems to have something to do with ritual performance and therevelation or concealment of esoteric knowledge.54 Intriguingly, this isexactly what indigenous informants were still telling Spanish soldiers andchroniclers who arrived at the site in the seventeenth century. For as long asanyone could remember, they said, Chavín had been a place of pilgrimagebut also one of supernatural danger, on which the heads of importantfamilies converged from different parts of the country to seek visions andoracles: the ‘speech of the stones’. Despite initial scepticism, archaeologistshave gradually come round to accepting that they were right.55 

It’s not just the evidence for ritual and altered states of mind, but also theextraordinary architecture of the place. The temples at Chavín contain stonelabyrinths and hanging staircases which seem designed not for communalacts of worship but for individual trials, initiations and vision quests. Theyimply tortuous journeys ending at narrow corridors, large enough for only asingle person, beyond which lies a tiny sanctum containing a monolith,carved with dense tangles of images. The most famous such monument, astela called ‘El Lanzón’ (‘the lance’), is a shaft of granite over thirteen feettall, around which the Old Temple of Chavín was constructed. A well-litreplica of the stela, often assumed to represent a god who is also the axis mundi, or a central pillar connecting the polar ends of a shamanic universe,has pride of place in Peru’s Museo de la Nación; but the 3,000-year-oldoriginal still resides at the heart of a darkened maze, illuminated by thin 
slats, where no single viewer could ever grasp the totality of its form ormeaning.56 

If Chavín – a remote precursor to the Inca – was an ‘empire’, it was onebuilt on images linked to esoteric knowledge. Olmec was, on the otherhand, an ‘empire’ built on spectacle, competition and the personal attributesof political leaders. Clearly, our use of the term ‘empire’ here is about asloose as it could possibly be. Neither was remotely similar to, say, theRoman or Han, or indeed the Inca and Aztec Empires. Nor do they fulﬁlany of the important criteria for ‘statehood’ – at least not on most standardsociological deﬁnitions (monopoly of violence, levels of administrativehierarchy, and so forth). The usual recourse is to describe such regimesinstead as ‘complex chiefdoms’, but this too seems hopelessly inadequate –a shorthand way of saying, ‘looks somewhat like a state, but it isn’t one’.This tells us precisely nothing.
What makes more sense, we suggest, is to look at these otherwisepuzzling cases through the lens of our three elementary principles ofdomination – control of violence (or sovereignty), control of knowledge,and charismatic politics – outlined at the start of the chapter. In doing so,we can see how each stresses a particular form of domination to anexceptional degree and develops it on an unusually large scale. Let’s give it a go.
First, in the case of Chavín, power over a large and dispersed populationwas clearly about retaining control over certain kinds of knowledge:something perhaps not that far removed from the idea of ‘state secrets’found in later bureaucratic regimes, although the content was obviouslyvery different, and there was little in the way of military force to back it up.In the Olmec tradition, power involved certain formalized ways ofcompeting for personal recognition, in an atmosphere of play laced withrisk: a prime example of a large-scale, competitive political ﬁeld, but againin the absence of territorial sovereignty or an administrative apparatus. Nodoubt there was a certain degree of personal charisma and jockeying atChavín; no doubt among the Olmec, too, some obtained inﬂuence by theircommand of arcane knowledge; but neither case gives us reason to thinkanyone was asserting a strong principle of sovereignty.
We’ll refer to these as ‘ﬁrst-order regimes’ because they seem to beorganized around one of the three elementary forms of domination (knowledge-control, for Chavín; charismatic politics for Olmec), to therelative neglect of the other two. The obvious next question, then, iswhether examples of the third possible variant can also be found: i.e. casesof societies which develop a principle of sovereignty (that is, grant anindividual or small group a monopoly on the right to use violence withimpunity), and take it to extreme lengths, without either an apparatus forcontrolling knowledge or any sort of competitive political ﬁeld. In fact,there are quite a lot of examples. Admittedly, the existence of such a societywould probably be more difﬁcult to establish from archaeological evidencealone, but to illustrate this third variant we can turn, fortunately, to morerecent Amerindian societies where written documentation is available. 
As always, we must be careful with such sources, since they are writtenby European observers who not only brought their own biases but tended todescribe societies already enmeshed in the chaotic destruction thatEuropeans themselves almost invariably brought in their wake. Still, Frenchaccounts of the Natchez of southern Louisiana in the eighteenth centuryseem to describe exactly the sort of arrangement we are interested in. Bygeneral consent, the Natchez (who called themselves Théoloël, or ‘Peopleof the Sun’) represent the only undisputed case of divine kingship north ofthe Rio Grande. Their ruler enjoyed an absolute power of command thatwould have satisﬁed a Sapa Inca or Egyptian pharaoh; but they had aminimal bureaucracy, and nothing like a competitive political ﬁeld. As faras we know it has never occurred to anyone to refer to this arrangement as a‘state’. 
ON SOVEREIGNTY WITHOUT ‘THE STATE’ 
Let us turn to the work of a French Jesuit, Father Maturin Le Petit, whogave an account of the Natchez in the early eighteenth century. Le Petitfound the Natchez to be nothing like the people Jesuits had encountered inwhat is now Canada. He was especially struck by their religious practices.These revolved around a settlement all the French sources refer to as the Great Village, which centred on two great earthen platforms separated by aplaza. On one platform was a temple; on the other a kind of palace, thehouse of a ruler called the Great Sun, large enough to contain up to 4,000people, roughly the size of the entire Natchez population at the time. 
The temple, in which an eternal ﬁre burned, was dedicated to the founderof the royal dynasty. The current ruler, together with his brother (called ‘theTattooed Serpent’) and eldest sister (‘the White Woman’), were for theirown parts treated with something that seemed very much like worship.Anyone who came into their presence was expected to bow and wail, and toretreat backwards. No one, not even the king’s wives, was allowed to sharea meal with him; only the most privileged could even see him eat. What thismeant in practice was that members of the royal family lived out their liveslargely within the conﬁnes of the Great Village itself, rarely venturingbeyond.57 The king himself emerged mainly during major rituals or times of war. 
Le Petit and other French observers – who at the time lived under the suzerainty of Louis XIV, who of course also fancied himself a ‘Sun King’ –were quite fascinated by the parallels: as a result, they described the goings-on in the Great Village in some detail. The Natchez Great Sun might nothave had the grandeur of Louis XIV, but what he lacked in that regard heappeared to make up for in terms of sheer personal power. French observerswere particularly struck by the arbitrary executions of Natchez subjects, theproperty conﬁscations and the way in which, at royal funerals, courtretainers would – often, apparently, quite willingly – offer themselves up tobe strangled to accompany the Great Sun and his closest family members indeath. Those sacriﬁced on such occasions consisted largely of people whowere, up to that point, immediately responsible for the king’s care and hisphysical needs – including his wives, who were invariably commoners (theNatchez were matrilineal, so it was the White Woman’s children thatsucceeded to the throne). Many, according to French accounts, went to theirdeaths voluntarily, even joyfully. One wife remarked how she dreamed ofﬁnally being able to share a meal with her husband, in another world.
One paradoxical outcome of these arrangements was that, for most of theyear, the Great Village was largely depopulated. As noted by anotherobserver, Father Pierre de Charlevoix, ‘The great Village of the Natchez isat present reduced to a very few Cabins. The Reason which I heard for thisis that the Savages, from whom the Great Chief has the Right to take allthey have, get as far away from him as they can; and therefore, manyVillages of this Nation have been formed at some Distance from this.’58 

Away from the Great Village, ordinary Natchez appear to have led verydifferent lives, often showing blissful disregard for the wishes of their ostensible rulers. They conducted their own independent commercial andmilitary ventures, and sometimes ﬂatly refused royal commands conveyedby the Great Sun’s emissaries or relatives. Archaeological surveys of theNatchez Bluffs region bear this out, showing that the eighteenth-century‘kingdom’ in fact comprised semi-autonomous districts, including manysettlements that were both larger and wealthier in trade goods than the GreatVillage itself.59 

How exactly are we to understand this situation? It might seemparadoxical – but historically such arrangements are not particularlyunusual. The Great Sun was a sovereign in the classical sense of the term,which is to say he embodied a principle that was seen as higher than law.Therefore no law applied to him. This is a very common bit ofcosmological reasoning that we ﬁnd, in some form or another, almostanywhere from Bologna to Mbanza Congo. Just as gods (or God) are notseen as bound by morality – since only a principle existing beyond goodand evil could have created good and evil to begin with – so ‘divine kings’cannot be judged in human terms; behaving in arbitrarily violent ways toanyone around them is itself proof of their transcendent status. Yet at thesame time, they are expected to be creators and enforcers of systems ofjustice. Such with the Natchez too. The Great Sun was said to be descendedfrom a child of the Sun who came to earth bearing a universal code of laws,among the most prominent of which were proscriptions against theft andmurder. Yet the Great Sun himself ostentatiously violated those laws on aregular basis, as if to prove his identiﬁcation with a principle prior to lawand, therefore, able to create it.
The problem with this sort of power (at least, from the sovereign’svantage point) is that it tends to be intensely personal. It is almostimpossible to delegate. The king’s sovereignty extends about as far as theking himself can walk, reach, see or be carried. Within that circle it isabsolute. Outside it, it attenuates rapidly. As a result, in the absence of anadministrative system (and the Natchez king had only a handful ofassistants), claims to labour, tribute or obedience could, if consideredodious, be simply ignored. Even the ‘absolutist’ monarchs of theRenaissance, like Henry VIII or Louis XIV, had a great deal of troubledelegating their authority – that is, convincing their subjects to treat royalrepresentatives as deserving anything like the same deference andobedience due to the king himself. Even if one does develop an administrative apparatus (as they of course did), there is the additionalproblem of how to get the administrators actually to do what they’re told –and, by the same token, how to get anyone to tell you if they aren’t. As lateas the 1780s, as Max Weber liked to point out, Frederick the Great ofPrussia found that his repeated efforts to free the country’s serfs came tonothing because bureaucrats would simply ignore the decrees or, ifchallenged by his legates, insisted the words of the decree should beinterpreted as saying the exact opposite of what was obviously intended.60 

In this sense, French observers were not entirely off the mark: theNatchez court really could be considered a sort of hyper-concentratedversion of Versailles. On the one hand, the Great Sun’s power in hisimmediate presence was even more absolute (Louis could not actually snaphis ﬁngers and order someone executed on the spot); while on the other, hisability to extend that power was even more restricted (Louis did, after all,have an administration at his disposal, though a fairly limited one comparedto modern nation states). Natchez sovereignty was, effectively, bottled up.There was even a suggestion that this power, and particularly its benevolentaspect, was in some way dependent on being bottled up. According to oneaccount, the main ritual role of the king was to seek blessings for his people
– health, fertility, prosperity – from the original lawgiver, a being who in hislifetime was so terrifying and destructive that he eventually agreed to beturned into a stone statue and hidden in a temple where no one would seehim.61 In a similar way, the king was sacred, and could be a conduit forsuch blessings, precisely insofar as he could be contained.
The Natchez case illustrates, with unusual clarity, a more generalprinciple whereby the containment of kings becomes one of the keys totheir ritual power. Sovereignty always represents itself as a symbolic breakwith the moral order; this is why kings so often commit some kind ofoutrage to establish themselves, massacring their brothers, marrying theirsisters, desecrating the bones of their ancestors or, in some documentedcases, literally standing outside their palace and gunning down randompassers-by.62 Yet that very act establishes the king as potential lawmakerand high tribunal, in much the same way that ‘High Gods’ are so oftenrepresented as both throwing random bolts of lightning, and standing injudgment over the moral acts of human beings.
People have an unfortunate tendency to see the successful prosecution ofarbitrary violence as in some sense divine, or at least to identify it with some kind of transcendental power. We might not fall on our knees beforeany thug or bully who manages to wreak havoc with impunity (at least, if heisn’t actually in the room), but insofar as such a ﬁgure does manage toestablish themselves as genuinely standing above the law – in other words,as sacred or set apart – another apparently universal principle kicks in: inorder to keep him apart from the muck and mire of ordinary human life, thatsame ﬁgure becomes surrounded with restrictions. Violent men generallyinsist on tokens of respect, but tokens of respect taken to the cosmologicallevel – ‘not to touch the earth’, ‘not to see the sun’ – tend to become severelimits on one’s freedom to act, violently or indeed in most other ways.63 

For most of history, this was the internal dynamic of sovereignty. Rulerswould try to establish the arbitrary nature of their power; their subjects,insofar as they were not simply avoiding the kings entirely, would try tosurround the godlike personages of those rulers with an endless maze ofritual restrictions, so elaborate that the rulers ended up, effectively,imprisoned in their palaces – or even, as in some of the cases of ‘divinekingship’ ﬁrst made famous by Sir James Frazer’s The Golden Bough,facing ritual death themselves. 
So far, then, we have seen how each of the three principles we began with –violence, knowledge and charisma – could, in ﬁrst-order regimes, becomethe basis for political structures which, in some ways, resemble what wethink of as a state, but in others clearly don’t. None could in any sense bedescribed as ‘egalitarian’ societies – they were all organized around a veryclearly demarcated elite – but at the same time, it’s not at all clear how farthe existence of such elites restricted the basic freedoms we described in earlier chapters. There is little reason to believe, for instance, that suchregimes did much to impair freedom of movement: Natchez subjectsseemed to have faced little opposition if they chose simply to move awayfrom the proximity of the Great Sun, which they generally did. Neither dowe ﬁnd any clear sense of the giving or taking of orders, except in thesovereign’s immediate (and decidedly limited) ambit.
Another instructive case of sovereignty without the state is found in therecent history of South Sudan, among the Shilluk, a Nilotic people livingalongside the Nuer. To recap, the early-twentieth-century Nuer were apastoral society, of the sort often referred to in the anthropological literatureas ‘egalitarian’ (though not, in fact, entirely so), because of their extreme distaste for any situation that might even suggest the giving and taking oforders. The Shilluk speak a western Nilotic language closely related toNuer, and most believe that at some point in the past they were one people.While the Nuer occupied lands best ﬁt for cattle-grazing, the Shilluk foundthemselves living along a fertile stretch of the White Nile, which allowedthem to grow the local grain known as durra, and support densepopulations. However, the Shilluk – unlike the Nuer – had a king. Knownas the reth, this Shilluk monarch could also be seen as embodyingsovereignty in the raw, in much the same way as the Natchez Great Sun.
Both the Great Sun and the Shilluk reth could act with total impunity, butonly towards those in their immediate presence. Each normally resided inan isolated capital, where he conducted regular rituals to guarantee fertilityand well-being. According to one Italian missionary, writing in the earlytwentieth century: 
The Reth lives isolated, as a rule, with some of his wives in the
small but famous hill-village of Pacooda, known as Fashoda … His
person is sacred and can be approached only with difﬁculty by
ordinary people, and only with elaborate etiquette by the higher
class. His appearance among the people, as for a journey, is rare and
awe-inspiring, so that most people used to go into hiding or keep out
of his path; girls especially do so.64 

The latter presumably for fear of being snatched up and carried off to theroyal harem. Yet to be a royal wife was not without advantages, as thecollege of royal wives was effectively what substituted for anadministration, maintaining connections between Fashoda and their natalvillages; and it was powerful enough, if the wives came to consensus, toorder the king’s execution. Then again, the reth also had his henchmen: often these were orphans, criminals, runaways and other unattached personswho would gravitate to him. If the king attempted to mediate a local disputeand one party refused to comply, he would occasionally throw in his lotwith the other side, raid the offending village and carry off what cattle andother things of value his men could get their hands on. The royal treasurythus consisted almost entirely of wealth that had been stolen, plundered inraids on foreigners or on the king’s own subjects. 
All this might seem a pretty poor model for a free society – but in fact, ineveryday affairs ordinary Shilluk appear to have maintained the sameﬁercely independent attitude as Nuer, and to have been just as averse totaking orders. Even the members of the ‘higher class’ (basically,descendants of earlier kings) could expect only a few gestures of deference,certainly not obedience. An old Shilluk legend sums it up nicely: 
There was once a cruel king, who killed many of his subjects, he
even killed women. His subjects were terriﬁed of him. One day, to
demonstrate that his subjects were so afraid they would do anything
he asked, he assembled the Shilluk chiefs and ordered them to wall
him up inside a house with a young girl. Then he ordered them to let
him out again. They didn’t. So he died.65 

If such oral traditions are anything to go on, Shilluk appear to have made aconscious choice that the sporadic appearance of an arbitrary andsometimes violent sovereign was preferable to any gentler but moresystematic method of rule. Whenever a reth attempted to set up anadministrative apparatus, even if only to collect tribute from defeatedpeoples, his actions were met with overwhelming waves of popular protestthat either forced him to abandon the project or ousted him entirely.66 

Unlike the Shilluk reth, Chavín and Olmec elites were able to mobilizeenormous amounts of labour, but it’s not at all clear if they did so throughchains of command. As we’ve seen in ancient Mesopotamia, corvée orperiodic labour service could also be a festive, public-spirited, evenlevelling occasion. (And as we shall see in the case of ancient Egypt, themost authoritarian regimes still often ensured it continued to havesomething of the same spirit.) Lastly, then, we should consider the impactof such ﬁrst-order regimes on our third basic form of freedom: the freedomto shift and renegotiate social relations, either seasonally or permanently.This is, of course, the hardest to assess. Certainly, most of these new formsof power had a decidedly seasonal element. During certain times of year, aswith the makers of Stonehenge, the entire social apparatus of authoritywould dissolve away and effectively cease to exist. What seems mostdifﬁcult to comprehend is how these strikingly new institutional arrangements, and the physical infrastructure that sustained them, came intobeing in the ﬁrst place.
Who came up with the design for the labyrinthine temple of Chavín deHuántar, or the royal compounds of La Venta? Insofar as they werecollectively conceived – as they may well have been67 – such grandfabrications may themselves be considered extraordinary exercises inhuman freedom. None of these ﬁrst-order regimes could be consideredexamples of state formation – few now would even claim they were. Solet’s turn instead to one of the only cases that pretty much everyone agrees can be considered a state, and which has served, in many ways, as aparadigm for all subsequent states: ancient Egypt. 
HOW CARING LABOUR, RITUAL KILLING AND ‘TINYBUBBLES’ ALL CAME TOGETHER IN THE ORIGINS OF ANCIENT EGYPT 
If we had no written accounts to go by, but only the archaeological remainsof the Natchez, would we have any way of knowing that a ﬁgure like theGreat Sun even existed in Natchez society? Conceivably not. We wouldknow that there were some fairly large mounds in the Great Village, built upin various stages, and no doubt post-holes would provide evidence for somelarge wooden structures built on them. Inside those structures, a number ofhearths, refuse pits and scattered artefacts would undoubtedly point to someof the activities that went on there.68 Perhaps the only compelling evidenceof kingship, though, would come in the form of burials of richly decoratedbodies surrounded by sacriﬁced retainers – if, that is, archaeologistshappened to locate them.69 

For some readers, the idea of a dead monarch sent off to the afterlifeamid the corpses of his retainers might evoke images of early pharaohs.Some of Egypt’s earliest known kings, those of the First Dynasty around3000 BC (who, in fact, were not yet referred to as ‘pharaoh’), were indeedburied in this way.70 But Egypt is not alone in this respect. Burials of kingssurrounded by dozens, hundreds, on some occasions even thousands ofhuman victims killed specially for the occasion can be found in almostevery part of the world where monarchies did eventually establishthemselves, from the early dynastic city-state of Ur in Mesopotamia to theKerma polity in Nubia to Shang China. There are also credible literary 
descriptions from Korea, Tibet, Japan and the Russian steppes. Somethingsimilar seems to have occurred as well in the Moche and Wari societies of South America, and the Mississippian city of Cahokia.71 

We might do well to think a bit more about these mass killings, becausemost archaeologists now treat them as one of the more reliable indicationsthat a process of ‘state formation’ was indeed under way. They follow asurprisingly consistent pattern. Almost invariably, they mark the ﬁrst fewgenerations of the founding of a new empire or kingdom, often beingimitated by rivals in other elite households; then the practice graduallyfades away (though sometimes surviving in very attenuated versions, as insati or widow-suicide among largely kshatriya – warrior-caste – families in much of South Asia). In the initial moment, the practice of ritual killingaround a royal burial tends to be spectacular: almost as if the death of aruler meant a brief moment when sovereignty broke free of its ritual fetters,triggering a kind of political supernova that annihilates everything in itspath, including some of the highest and mightiest individuals in thekingdom.
Often, in that moment, close members of the royal family, high-rankingmilitary ofﬁcers and government ofﬁcials are counted among the victims.Of course, if looking at a burial without written records, it’s often hard totell when we’re dealing with the bodies of royal wives, viziers or courtmusicians, as opposed to those of war captives, slaves or commoners seizedrandomly on the road (as we know was sometimes done in Buganda orBenin) – or even entire military units (as was sometimes the case in China).Perhaps, indeed, the individuals named as kings and queens in the famousRoyal Tombs of Ur were not really that at all, but just hapless victims,substitute ﬁgures or maybe high-ranking priests and priestesses dressed upas royalty.72 

Even if some cases were just a particularly bloody form of costumedrama, others clearly weren’t, so the question remains: why did earlykingdoms ever do this sort of thing at all? And why did they stop doing itonce their power became more established?
At the Shang capital of Anyang, on the central Chinese Plain, rulerstended to make their way into the afterlife accompanied by a few importantretainers, who went voluntarily – if not always happily – to their deaths andwere interred with due honours. These were only a small proportion of thebodies that went with them. It was also a royal prerogative to have one’s tomb surrounded by the bodies of sacriﬁcial victims.73 Often these appearto be war captives taken from rival lineages and – unlike the retainers –their bodies were systematically mutilated, usually in mockingrearrangements of the victims’ heads. For the Shang, this seems to havebeen a way of denying their victims the possibility of becoming dynasticancestors, thereby rendering the living members of their lineage unable totake part in the care and feeding of their own dead kin, ordinarily one of thefundamental duties of family life. Cast adrift, and socially scarred, thesurvivors were more likely to fall under the sway of the Shang court. Theruler became a greater ancestor, in effect, by preventing others frombecoming ancestors at all.74 

It’s interesting to bear this in mind when we turn to Egypt, because on thesurface what we observe in the earliest dynasties seems the exact opposite.The ﬁrst Egyptian kings, and at least one queen, are indeed buriedsurrounded by sacriﬁcial victims, but those victims seem to have beendrawn almost exclusively from their own inner circles. Our evidence forthis derives from a series of 5,000-year-old burial chambers, looted inantiquity but still visible near the site of the ancient city of Abydos in thelow desert of southern Egypt. These were the tombs of Egypt’s FirstDynasty.75 Around each royal tomb lie long rows of subsidiary burials,numbering in the hundreds, forming a kind of perimeter. Such ‘retainerburials’ – including royal attendants and courtiers, killed in the prime of life
– were placed in smaller brick compartments of their own, each markedwith a gravestone inscribed with the individual’s ofﬁcial titles.76 There do not appear to be any dead captives or enemies among the buried. On thedeath of a king, then, his successor appears to have presided instead overthe death of his predecessor’s courtly entourage, or at least a sizeableportion of it.
So why all this ritual killing at the birth of the Egyptian state? What wasthe actual purpose of subsidiary burials? Was it to protect the dead kingfrom the living, or the living from the dead king? Why did those sacriﬁcedinclude so many who had evidently spent their lives caring for the king:most likely including wives, guards, ofﬁcials, cooks, grooms, entertainers,palace dwarfs and other servants, grouped by rank around the royal tomb,according to their roles or occupation? There is a terrible paradox here. Onthe one hand, we have a ritual that appears to be the ultimate expression oflove and devotion, as those who on a day-to-day basis made the king into something king-like – fed him, clothed him, trimmed his hair, cared for himin sickness and kept him company when he was lonely – went willingly totheir deaths, to ensure he would continue to be king in the afterlife. At thesame time, these burials are the ultimate demonstration that for a ruler, evenhis most intimate subjects could be treated as personal possessions, casuallydisposed of like so many blankets, gaming boards or jugs of spelt. Manyhave speculated about what it all means. Likely as not, 5,000 years ago,many of those laying out the bodies wondered too.
Written records from the time don’t give us much sense of the ofﬁcialmotives, but one thing that’s quite striking in the evidence we do have –largely, a list of names and titles – is the very mixed composition of theseroyal cemeteries. They seem to include both blood relatives of the earlykings and queens, notably some female members of the royal family, and agood number of other individuals who were taken in as members of theroyal household owing to their unusual skills or striking personal qualities,and who thus came to be seen as members of the king’s extended family.The violence and shedding of blood that attended these mass funeraryrituals must have gone some way to effacing those differences, meldingthem into a single unit, turning servants into relatives and relatives intoservants. In later times the king’s close kin represented themselves inexactly this way, by placing in their tombs some humble replicas ofthemselves engaged in acts of menial labour, such as grinding grain orcooking meals.77 

When sovereignty ﬁrst expands to become the general organizingprinciple of a society, it is by turning violence into kinship. The early,spectacular phase of mass killing in both China and Egypt, whatever else itmay be doing, appears to be intended to lay the foundations of what MaxWeber referred to as a ‘patrimonial system’: that is, one in which all thekings’ subjects are imagined as members of the royal household, at least tothe degree that they are all working to care for the king. Turning erstwhilestrangers into part of the royal household, or denying them their ownancestors, are thereby ultimately two sides of the same coin.78 Or to putthings another way, a ritual designed to produce kinship becomes a methodof producing kingship.
These extreme forms of ritual killing around royal burials ended fairlyabruptly in the course of Egypt’s Second Dynasty. However, the patrimonialpolity continued to expand – not so much in the sense of expanding Egypt’s external borders, which were established early on through outward violencedirected at neighbours in Nubia and elsewhere,79 but more in terms of reshaping the lives of its internal subjects. Within a few generations we ﬁndthe valley and delta of the Nile divided into royal estates, each dedicated toprovisioning the mortuary cults of different former rulers; and, not longafter that, the foundation of entire ‘workers’ towns’ devoted to theconstruction of the pyramids on the Giza Plateau, drawing corvée labourfrom up and down the country.80 

At this point, with the construction of the great pyramids at Giza, surelyno one could deny that we are in the presence of some sort of state; but thepyramids, of course, were also tombs. In the case of Egypt, it seems, ‘stateformation’ began with some kind of Natchez or Shilluk-like principle ofindividual sovereignty, bursting out of its ritual cages precisely through thevehicle of the sovereign’s demise in such a way that royal death ultimatelybecame the basis for reorganizing much of human life along the length ofthe Nile. To understand how this could happen, we need to look at whatEgypt was like well before the First Dynasty tombs at Abydos. 
Before we consider what happened in the centuries directly precedingEgypt’s First Dynasty – the so-called Predynastic and Proto-dynasticperiods, from around 4000 to 3100 BC – it is worth casting our minds backto an even earlier phase of prehistory in the same region.
Let’s recall that the African Neolithic, including that of the Nile valley –Egyptian and Sudanese – took a different form to that of the Middle East. Inthe ﬁfth millennium BC, there was less of an emphasis on cereal agricultureand more on cattle, along with the wide variety of wild and cultivated foodsources typical of the period. Perhaps the best modern comparison we have
– though it’s very far from exact – is with Nilotic peoples like the Nuer,Dinka, Shilluk or Anuak, who grow crops but think of themselves aspastoralists, shifting back and forth each season between camps improvisedfor the occasion. If we might hazard a very broad generalization, where inthe Middle Eastern Neolithic (the Fertile Crescent) the cultural focus – inthe sense of decorative arts, care and attention – was on houses, in Africa itwas on bodies: from very early on we have burials with beautifully workedobjects of personal grooming and highly elaborate sets of bodyornamentation.81 

It’s no coincidence that many centuries later, when the Egyptian FirstDynasty took form, among the very ﬁrst objects with royal inscriptions weﬁnd the ‘ivory comb of King Djet’ and the famous ‘palette of King Narmer’(stone palettes being used, both by men and women, for grinding andmixing make-up). These are basically spectacular versions of the sort ofobjects Neolithic Nile dwellers used to beautify themselves millenniaearlier and, not coincidentally, to offer as gifts to the ancestral dead; and inNeolithic and Predynastic times, such objects were widely available towomen, men and children. In fact from those very early times, in Niloticsociety the human body itself became a sort of monument. Experimentswith techniques of mummiﬁcation took place long before the First Dynasty;as early as the Neolithic period, Egyptians were already mixing aromaticsand preservative oils to produce bodies that could last forever and whoseplaces of burial were the ﬁxed points of reference in an ever-shifting sociallandscape.82 

How, then, do we get from such a remarkably ﬂuid state of affairs to thespectacular appearance of the First Dynasty almost 2,000 years later?Territorial kingdoms don’t come out of nowhere.83 Until quite recently, wehad little more than fragmentary hints of what must have been happeningduring what are technically referred to as the Predynastic and Proto.dynastic periods – that is, roughly the fourth millennium, before KingNarmer appears around 3100 BC. In such cases, it is tempting to revert toanalogies with more recent situations. As we’ve seen, modern Niloticpeoples, and particularly the Shilluk, show how relatively mobile societiesthat place great value on individual freedom might, nonetheless, prefer anarbitrary despot – who could eventually be got rid of – to any moresystematic or pervasive form of rule. This is especially true if, like so manypeoples whose ancestors organized their lives around livestock, they tendtoward patriarchal forms of organization.84 One could imagine theprehistoric Nile valley as dominated by a collection of Shilluk-like reths,each with their own settlement which was, essentially, an extendedpatriarchal family; bickering and feuding with one another, but otherwise,as yet, making fairly little difference to the lives of those over whom theyostensibly ruled.
Still, there is no substitute for actual archaeological evidence – and inrecent years it has been building up apace. New discoveries show that, byno later than 3500 BC – and so still some ﬁve centuries before the First Dynasty – we do indeed ﬁnd burials of petty monarchs at various locationsthroughout the valley of the Nile, and also down into Nubia. We don’t knowany of their names, since writing had barely developed yet. Most of thesekingdoms appear to have been extremely small. The largest we know ofcentred on Naqada and Abydos, near the great bend of the Nile in UpperEgypt; on Hierakonpolis further to the south; and on the site of Qustul inLower Nubia – but even those do not seem to have controlled extensive territories.85 

What preceded the First Dynasty, then, was not so much a lack ofsovereign power as a superﬂuity of it: a surfeit of tiny kingdoms andminiature courts, always with a core of blood relatives and a motleycollection of henchmen, wives, servants and assorted hangers-on. Some ofthese courts appear to have been quite magniﬁcent in their own way,leaving behind large tombs and the bodies of sacriﬁced retainers. The mostspectacular, at Hierakonpolis, includes not only a male dwarf (they seem tohave become a ﬁxture of courtly society very early on), but a signiﬁcantnumber of teenage girls, and what seem to be the remains of a private zoo: amenagerie of exotic animals including two baboons and an Africanelephant.86 These kings give every sign of making grandiose, absolute,cosmological claims; but little sign of maintaining administrative ormilitary control over their respective territories.
How do we get from here to the massive agrarian bureaucracy of later,dynastic times in Egypt? Part of the answer lies in a parallel process ofchange that archaeology also allows us to untangle, around the middle ofthe fourth millennium BC – we might imagine it as a kind of extendedargument or debate about the responsibilities of the living to the dead. Dodead kings, like live ones, still need us to take care of them? Is this caredifferent from the care accorded ordinary ancestors? Do ancestors gethungry? And if so, what exactly do they eat? For whatever reasons, theanswer that gained traction across the Nile valley around 3500 BC was that ancestors do indeed get hungry, and what they required was somethingwhich, at that time, can only have been considered a rather exotic andperhaps luxurious form of food: leavened bread and fermented wheat beer,the pot-containers for which now start to become standard ﬁxtures of well-appointed grave assemblages. It is no coincidence that arable wheat-farming – though long familiar in the valley and delta of the Nile – was 
only reﬁned and intensiﬁed around this time, at least partly in response tothe new demands of the dead.87 

The two processes – agronomic and ceremonial – were mutuallyreinforcing, and the social effects epochal. In effect, they led to the creationof what might be considered the world’s ﬁrst peasantry. As in so many partsof the world initially favoured by Neolithic populations, the periodicﬂooding of the Nile had at ﬁrst made permanent division of lands difﬁcult;quite likely, it was not ecological circumstances but the social requirementto provide bread and beer on ceremonial occasions that allowed suchdivisions to become entrenched. This was not just a matter of access tosufﬁcient quantities of arable land, but also the means to maintain ploughsand oxen – another introduction of the late fourth millennium BC. Families who found themselves unable to command such resources had to obtain beer and loaves elsewhere, creating networks of obligation and debt. Henceimportant class distinctions and dependencies did, in fact, begin to emerge,88 as a sizeable sector of Egypt’s population found itself deprivedof the means to care independently for ancestors.
If any of this seems fanciful, we need only compare what happened withthe extension of Inca sovereignty in Peru. Here, too, we ﬁnd a contrastbetween the traditional, varied and ﬂexible regime of everyday foodstuffs –in this case centring on cuisine made from freeze-dried potatoes (chuño) –and the introduction of a completely different sort of food, in this case,maize beer (chicha), which was considered ﬁt for the gods and alsogradually became, as it were, the food of empire.89 By the time of theSpanish conquest, maize was a ritual necessity for rich and poor alike. Godsand royal mummies dined on it; armies marched on it; and those too poor togrow it – or who lived too high up on the altiplano – had to ﬁnd other waysof obtaining it, often ending up in debt to the royal estate as a result.90 

In the case of Peru, we have the Spanish chroniclers to help usunderstand how an intoxicant could gradually become the lifeblood of anempire; in Egypt, 5,000 years ago, we can really only guess at the details. Itis a remarkable tribute to the discipline of archaeology that we know asmuch as we do, and we are starting to put the pieces together. For instance,it is around 3500 BC that we begin to ﬁnd remains of facilities used for bothbaking and brewing – ﬁrst alongside cemeteries, and within a few centuriesattached to palaces and grand tombs.91 A later depiction, from the tomb ofan ofﬁcial called Ty, shows how they could have operated, with pot-baked bread and beer produced by a single process. The gradual extension of royalauthority, and also administrative reach, throughout Egypt began around thetime of the First Dynasty or a little before, with the creation of estatesostensibly dedicated to organizing the provision, not so much of livingkings but of dead ones, and eventually dead royal ofﬁcials too. By the timeof the Great Pyramids (c.2500 BC), bread and beer were being manufacturedon an industrial scale to supply armies of workers during their seasonalservice on royal construction projects, when they too got to be ‘relatives’ orat least care-givers of the king, and as such were at least temporarily wellprovisioned and well cared for.
The workers’ town at Giza produced some thousands of ceramic moulds.These were used to make the huge communal loaves known as bedja bread,eaten in large groups with copious amounts of meat supplied by royallivestock pens and washed down with spiced beer.92 The latter was of special importance for the solidarity of seasonal work crews in OldKingdom Egypt. The facts emerge with disarming simplicity, from grafﬁtion the reverse sides of building blocks used in the construction of royalpyramids. ‘Friends of [the king] Menkaure’ reads one such, ‘Drunkards ofMenkaure’ another. These seasonal work units (or phyles, as Egyptologistscall them) seem to have been made up only of men who passed throughspecial age-grade rituals, and who modelled themselves on the organizationof a boat’s crew.93 Whether such ritual brotherhoods ever took to the water together isn’t clear, but there are notable parallels between the team skillsused in maritime engineering and those used in manipulating multi-tonblocks of limestone and granite for royal pyramid-temples or other such monuments.94 

There may be interesting parallels to explore here with what happened inthe Industrial Revolution, when techniques of discipline, transformingcrews of people into clock-like machines, were ﬁrst pioneered on sailingships and only later transferred to the factory ﬂoor. Were ancient Egyptianboat crews the model for what have been called the world’s ﬁrst production-line techniques, creating vast monuments, far more impressive thananything the world had yet seen, by dividing tasks into an endless variety ofsimple, mechanical components: cutting, dragging, hoisting, polishing?This is how the pyramids were actually built: by rendering subjects intogreat social machines, afterwards celebrated by mass conviviality.95 

We have just described, in broad outline, what’s widely treated as theworld’s ﬁrst known example of ‘state formation’. It would be easy to go onfrom here to generalize. Perhaps this is what a state actually is: acombination of exceptional violence and the creation of a complex socialmachine, all ostensibly devoted to acts of care and devotion.
There is obviously a paradox here. Caring labour is in a way the veryopposite of mechanical labour: it is about recognizing and understandingthe unique qualities, needs and peculiarities of the cared-for – whetherchild, adult, animal or plant – in order to provide what they require toﬂourish.96 Caring labour is distinguished by its particularity. If thoseinstitutions we today refer to as ‘states’ really do have any commonfeatures, one must certainly be a tendency to displace this caring impulse onto abstractions; today this is usually ‘the nation’, however broadly ornarrowly deﬁned. Perhaps this is why it’s so easy for us to see ancientEgypt as a prototype for the modern state: here too, popular devotion wasdiverted on to grand abstractions, in this case the ruler and the elite dead.This process is what made it possible for the whole arrangement to beimagined, simultaneously, as a family and as a machine, in which everyone(except of course the king) was ultimately interchangeable. From theseasonal work of tomb-building to the daily servicing of the ruler’s body(recall again how the ﬁrst royal inscriptions are found on combs and make.up palettes), most of human activity was directed upwards, either towardstending rulers (living and dead) or assisting them with their own task offeeding and caring for the gods.97 All this activity was seen as generating adownward ﬂow of divine blessings and protection, which occasionally tookmaterial form in the great feasts of the workers’ towns.
The problems come when we try to take this paradigm and apply italmost anywhere else. True, as we’ve noted, there are some interestingparallels between Egypt and Peru (all the more remarkable, consideringtheir strikingly different topographies – the ﬂat and easily navigable Nile asagainst the ‘vertical archipelagos’ of the Andes). These parallels appear inuncanny details, like the mummiﬁcation of dead rulers and the way inwhich such mummiﬁed rulers continue to maintain their own rural estates;the way living kings are treated as gods who have to make periodic tours oftheir domains. Both societies too shared a certain antipathy to urban life.Their capitals were really ceremonial centres, stages for royal display, withrelatively few permanent residents, and their ruling elites preferred to 
imagine their subjects as living in a realm of bucolic estates and huntinggrounds.98 But all this only serves to underline the degree to which othercases referred to in the literature as ‘early states’ were entirely different. 
IN WHICH WE REFLECT ON THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN WHAT ARE USUALLY CALLED ‘EARLY STATES’, FROMCHINA TO MESOAMERICA 
The kingdom of Egypt and the Inca Empire demonstrate what can happenwhen the principle of sovereignty arms itself with a bureaucracy andmanages to extend itself uniformly across a territory. As a result, they arevery often invoked as primordial examples of state formation, even thoughthey are dramatically separated in time and space. Almost none of the othercanonical ‘early states’ appear to have taken this approach.
Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, for instance, was made up of dozens ofcity-states of varying sizes, each governed by its own charismatic warrior-king – whose special, individual qualities were said to be recognized by thegods, and physically marked in the outstanding virility and allure of hisbody – all vying constantly for dominance. Only occasionally would oneruler gain enough of an upper hand to create something that might bedescribed as the beginnings of a uniﬁed kingdom or empire. It’s not clearwhether any of these early Mesopotamian rulers actually claimed‘sovereignty’ – at least in the absolute sense of standing outside the moralorder and thus being able to act with impunity, or to create entirely newsocial forms of their own volition. The cities they ostensibly ruled over hadbeen around for centuries: commercial hubs with strong traditions of self-governance, each with its own city gods who presided over local systems oftemple administration. Kings, in this case, almost never claimed to be godsthemselves, but rather the gods’ vicegerents, and sometimes heroicdefenders on earth: in short, delegates of sovereign power that residedproperly in heaven.99 The result was a dynamic tension between twoprinciples which, as we’ve seen, originally arose in opposition to oneanother: the administrative order of the river valleys and the heroic,individualistic politics of the surrounding highlands. Sovereignty, in the lastresort, belonged to the gods alone.100 

The Maya lowlands were different again. To be a Classic Maya ruler (ajaw) was to be a hunter and god-impersonator of the ﬁrst rank, a warrior whose body, on entering battle or during dance rituals, became host to thespirit of an ancestral hero, deity or dreamlike monsters. Ajaws were,effectively, like tiny squabbling gods. If anything was projected into thecosmos, in the Classic Maya case, it was precisely the principle ofbureaucracy. Most Mayanists would agree that Classic-period rulers lackeda sophisticated administrative apparatus, but they imagined the cosmos asitself a kind of administrative hierarchy, governed by predictable laws:101 
an intricate set of celestial or subterranean wheels within wheels, such thatit was possible to establish the exact birth and death dates of major deitiesthousands of years in the past (the deity Muwaan Mat, for instance, wasborn on 7 December 3121 BC, seven years before the creation of the currentuniverse), even if it would never occur to them to register the numbers,wealth, let alone birthdates of their own subjects.102 

So do these ‘early states’ have any common features at all? Obviously,some basic generalizations can be made. All deployed spectacular violenceat the pinnacle of the system; all ultimately depended on and to somedegree mimicked the patriarchal organization of households. In every case,the apparatus of government stood on top of some kind of division ofsociety into classes. But as we’ve seen in earlier chapters, these elementscould just as well exist without or prior to the creation of centralgovernment – and even when such government was established, they couldtake very different forms. In Mesopotamian cities, for instance, social classwas often based on land tenure and mercantile wealth. Temples doubled ascity banks and factories. Their gods might only leave the temple grounds onfestive occasions, but priests moved in broader circles, making interest-bearing loans to traders, watching over armies of female weavers andjealously guarding their ﬁelds and ﬂocks. There were powerful societies ofmerchants. We know much less about such matters in the Maya lowlands,but what we do know suggests that power was based less on the control ofland or commerce than on the ability to control ﬂows of people and loyaltydirectly, through intermarriage and the intensely personal bonds thatobtained between lords and lesser nobles. Hence the focus, in Classic Mayapolitics, on capturing high-status rivals in warfare as a form of ‘humancapital’ (something which hardly features in Mesopotamian sources).103 

Looking at China only seems to complicate things even further. In thetime of the late Shang, from 1200 to 1000 BC, Chinese society did sharecertain features with the other canonical ‘early states’ but, considered as an integrated whole, it’s entirely unique. Like Inca Cuzco, the Shang capital atAnyang was designed as a ‘pivot of the four quarters’ – a cosmologicalanchor for the entire kingdom, laid out as a grand stage for royal ritual. Likeboth Cuzco and the Egyptian capital of Memphis (and later Thebes), thecity was suspended between the worlds of the living and the dead, servingas home to the royal cemeteries and their attached mortuary temples, aswell as a living administration. Its industrial quarters produced enormousquantities of bronze vessels and jades, the tools used in communing with ancestors.104 But in most important ways, we ﬁnd little similarity betweenthe Shang and either Old Kingdom Egypt or Inca Peru. For one thing,Shang rulers did not claim sovereignty over an extended area. Theycouldn’t travel safely, let alone issue commands, outside a narrow band ofterritories clustered on the middle and lower reaches of the Yellow River,not far from the royal court.105 Even there one is left with a sense that theydidn’t really claim sovereignty in the same sense as Egyptian, Peruvian oreven Mayan rulers. The clearest evidence is the exceptional importance ofdivination in the early Chinese state, which stands in striking contrast topretty much all the other examples we’ve been looking at.106 

Effectively, any royal decision – whether war, alliance, the founding ofnew cities, or even such apparently trivial matters as extending royalhunting grounds – could only proceed if approved by the ultimateauthorities, who were the gods and ancestral spirits; and there was noabsolute assurance that such approval would be forthcoming in any givencase. Shang diviners appealed to gods through the medium of burntofferings. The process was as follows: when hosting gods or ancestors at aritual meal, kings or their diviners put turtle shells and ox scapulae on theﬁre, then ‘read’ the cracks that broke out on their surfaces as a kind oforacular writing. The proceedings were quite bureaucratic. Once an answerhad been obtained, the diviner or an appointed scribe would then authorizethe reading by etching an inscription on to bone or shell, and the resultingoracle would be stored for later consultation.107 These oracle texts are the ﬁrst written inscriptions in China we actually know about, and while it isvery possible that writing was used for everyday purposes on perishablemedia that don’t survive, there remains as yet no clear evidence for theother forms of administrative activity or archives that became so typical oflater Chinese dynasties, nor much in the way of an elaborate bureaucraticapparatus at all.108 

Like the Maya, Shang rulers routinely waged war to acquire stocks ofliving human victims for sacriﬁces. Rival courts to the Shang had their ownancestors, sacriﬁces and diviners, and while they appear to have recognizedthe Shang as paramount – especially in ritual contexts – there seemed to beno contradiction between this and actually going to war with them, if theyfelt there was sufﬁcient cause. Such rivalries help explain the lavishness ofShang funerals and mutilation of captive bodies; their rulers were still in asense playing the agonistic games typical of a ‘heroic society’, competingto outshine and humiliate their rivals. Such a situation is inherently unstableand eventually one rival dynasty, the Western Zhou, did manage deﬁnitivelyto defeat the Shang, and claimed for itself the Mandate of Heaven.109 

At this point it should be clear that what we are really talking about, in allthese cases, is not the ‘birth of the state’ in the sense of the emergence, inembryonic form, of a new and unprecedented institution that would growand evolve into modern forms of government. We are speaking instead ofbroad regional systems; it just happens, in the case of Egypt and the Andes,that an entire regional system became united (at least some of the time)under a single government. This was actually a fairly unusual arrangement.More common were arrangements such as those in Shang China, whereuniﬁcation was largely theoretical; or Mesopotamia, where regionalhegemony rarely lasted for longer than a generation or two; or the Maya,where there was a protracted struggle between two main power blocs,neither of which could ever quite overcome the other.110 

In terms of the speciﬁc theory we’ve been developing here, where thethree elementary forms of domination – control of violence, control ofknowledge, and charismatic power – can each crystallize into its owninstitutional form (sovereignty, administration and heroic politics), almostall these ‘early states’ could be more accurately described as ‘second-order’regimes of domination. First-order regimes like the Olmec, Chavín orNatchez each developed only one part of the triad. But in the typically farmore violent arrangements of second-order regimes, two of the threeprinciples of domination were brought together in some spectacular,unprecedented way. Which two it was seems to have varied from case tocase. Egypt’s early rulers combined sovereignty and administration;Mesopotamian kings mixed administration and heroic politics; ClassicMaya ajaws fused heroic politics with sovereignty. 
We should emphasize that it’s not as if any of these principles, in theirelementary forms, were entirely absent in any one case: in fact, what seemsto have happened is that two of them crystallized into institutional forms –fusing in such a way as to reinforce one another as the basis of government
– while the third form of domination was largely pushed out of the realm ofhuman affairs altogether and displaced on to the non-human cosmos (aswith divine sovereignty in Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, or the cosmicbureaucracy of the Classic Maya). Keeping all this in mind, let’s returnbrieﬂy to Egypt to clarify some remaining points. 
IN WHICH WE RECONSIDER THE EGYPTIAN CASE IN LIGHT OF OUR THREE ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF DOMINATION,AND ALSO REVISIT THE PROBLEM OF ‘DARK AGES’ 
The architects of Egypt’s Old Kingdom clearly saw the world they werecreating as something like a cultured pearl, reared in precious isolation.Their vision is vividly documented in relief carvings of stone, lining thewalls of royal temples, which served the mortuary cults of kings such asDjoser, Menkaure, Sneferu and Sahure. Here Egypt, the ‘Two Lands’, isalways represented as both a celestial theatre-state, in which king and godsshare equal billing, and an earthly domain: a world of rural estates andhunting grounds, mapped out in a cartography of compliance, each parcel ofland personiﬁed as a lady-in-waiting who brings her bounty to the feet ofthe king. The governing principle of this vision of Egypt is the monarch’sabsolute sovereignty over everything, symbolized in his gigantic funerarymonuments, his deﬁant assertion that there was nothing he could notconquer, even death.
Egyptian kingship was, however, Janus-faced. Its inner visage was that ofsupreme patriarch, standing guard over a vastly extended family – a GreatHouse (the literal meaning of ‘pharaoh’). Its outer face is shown indepictions of the king as a war leader or hunt leader asserting control overthe country’s wild frontiers; all were fair game when the king turned hisviolence upon them.111 This is very different, however, to heroic violence.In a way, it’s the opposite. In a heroic order, the warrior’s honour is basedon the fact that he might lose; his reputation means so much to him that heis willing to stake his life, dignity and freedom to defend it. Egyptian rulers,in these early periods, never represent themselves as heroic ﬁgures in this sense. They could not, conceivably, lose. As a result, wars are notrepresented as ‘political’ contests, which imply a match between potentialequals. Instead, combat and the chase alike were assertions of ownership,endless rehearsals of the same sovereignty the king exercised over hispeople and which ultimately derived from his kinship with the gods.
As we’ve already had occasion to observe, any form of sovereignty atonce so absolute and so personal as a pharaoh’s will necessarily pose severeproblems of delegation. Here, too, all state ofﬁcials had to be in some senseappendages of the king’s own person. Major landowners, militarycommanders, priests, administrators and other senior government ofﬁcialsalso held titles like ‘Keeper of the King’s Secrets’, ‘Beloved Acquaintanceof the King’, ‘Director of Music to the Pharaoh’, ‘Overseer of the PalaceManicurists’ or even ‘of the King’s Breakfast’. We are not suggesting thatpower games were absent here; no doubt there’s never been a royal courtwithout jockeying for position, tricks and double-dealing and politicalintrigue. The point is that these were not public contests, and no sanctionedspace existed for open competition. Everything remained conﬁned to life atcourt. This is abundantly clear in the ‘tomb biographies’ of Old Kingdomofﬁcials, which describe their life achievements almost exclusively in termsof their relationship to and their care for the king, rather than any personalqualities or attainments.112 

What we have in this case, then, seems to be a hypertrophy of theprinciples of sovereignty and administration and an almost completeabsence of competitive politics. Dramatic public contests of any sort,political or otherwise, were well-nigh non-existent. There is nothing in theofﬁcial sources of the Egyptian Old Kingdom (nor much in later periods ofancient Egyptian history) that is remotely reminiscent of, say, Romanchariot-racing or Olmec or Zapotec ball games. In the royal jubilee or sed festival, when Egyptian kings ran a circuit to celebrate the uniﬁcation of theTwo Lands of Upper and Lower Egypt, it took the form of a soloperformance, the outcome of which was never in doubt. Insofar ascompetitive politics appears in later Egyptian literature (which itoccasionally does), it takes place precisely between the gods, as in workslike the Contendings of Horus and Seth. Dead kings, perhaps, compete withone another; but by the time sovereignty comes down to the domain ofmortals, matters have already been settled. 
Just to be utterly clear about what we are saying here, when we speak ofan absence of charismatic politics we are talking about the absence of a‘star system’ or ‘hall of fame’, with institutionalized rivalries betweenknights, warlords, politicians and so on. We are most certainly not speakingabout an absence of individual personalities. It’s just that in a puremonarchy there is only one person, or at best a handful of individuals, whoreally matter. Indeed, if we are trying to understand the appeal of monarchyas a form of government – and it cannot be denied that for much ofrecorded human history it was a very popular one – then likely it hassomething to do with its ability to mobilize sentiments of a caring natureand abject terror at the same time. The king is both the ultimate individual,his quirks and fancies always to be indulged like a spoilt baby, and at thesame time the ultimate abstraction, since his powers over mass violence,and often (as in Egypt) mass production, can render everyone the same.
It is also worth observing that monarchy is probably the only prominentsystem of government we know of in which children are crucial players,since everything depends on the monarch’s ability to continue the dynasticline. The dead can be worshipped under any regime – even the UnitedStates, which frames itself as a beacon of democracy, creates temples to itsFounding Fathers and carves portraits of dead presidents into the sides ofmountains – but infants, pure objects of love and nurture, are onlypolitically important in kingdoms and empires. 
If the ancient Egyptian regime is often held out as the ﬁrst true state and aparadigm for all future ones, it is largely because it was capable ofsynthesizing absolute sovereignty – the monarch’s ability to stand apartfrom human society and engage in arbitrary violence with impunity – withan administrative apparatus which, at certain moments at least, could reducealmost everyone to cogs in a single great machine. Only heroic, competitivepolitics was lacking, pushed off into the worlds of gods and the dead. Butthere was, of course, a great exception to this which comes precisely inthose periods when central authority broke down, the supposed ‘dark ages’,beginning with the First Intermediate period (c. 2181–2055 BC).
Already towards the end of the Old Kingdom, ‘nomarchs’ or localgovernors had made themselves into de facto dynasties.113 When the central government split between rival centres at Herakleopolis and Thebes,such local leaders began to take over most functions of government. Often referred to as ‘warlords’, these nomarchs were in fact nothing like the pettykings of the Predynastic period. At least in their own monuments, theyrepresent themselves as something closer to popular heroes, even saints.Neither was this always just idle boasting; some were indeed revered assaints for centuries to come. No doubt charismatic local leaders had alwaysexisted in Egypt; but with the breakdown of the patrimonial state, suchﬁgures could begin to make open claims of authority based on theirpersonal achievements and attributes (bravery, generosity, oratorical andstrategic skills) and – crucially – redeﬁne social authority itself as based onqualities of public service and piety to the gods of their local town, and thepopular support those qualities inspired.
In other words, whenever state sovereignty broke down, heroic politicsreturned – with charismatic ﬁgures just as vainglorious and competitive,perhaps, as those we know from ancient epics, but far less bloodthirsty. Thechange is clearly visible in autobiographical inscriptions, like those in therock-cut tomb of the nomarch Ankhtiﬁ at El-Mo’alla, south of Thebes.Here’s how he narrates his role in war: ‘I was one who found the solution when it was lacking, thanks to my vigorous plans; one with commandingwords and untroubled mind on the day when the nomes [administeredterritories] allied together (to wage war). I am the hero without equal; onewho spoke freely while people were silent on the day when fear was spreadand Upper Egypt did not dare to speak.’ Even more striking, here’s how hecelebrates his social achievements: 
I gave bread to the hungry and clothing to the naked; I anointedthose who had no cosmetic oil; I gave sandals to the barefooted; Igave a wife to him who had no wife. I took care of the towns ofHefat [El-Mo’alla] and Hor-mer in every [crisis, when] the sky wasclouded and the earth [was parched? And people died] of hunger onthis sandbank of Apophis. The south came with its people and thenorth with its children; they brought ﬁnest oil in exchange for barleywhich was given to them … All of Upper Egypt was dying ofhunger and people were eating their children, but I did not allowanybody to die of hunger in this nome … never did I allow anybodyin need to go from this nome to another one. I am the hero withoutequal.114 

It’s only at this point, in the First Intermediate period, that we see ahereditary aristocracy coming into its own in Egypt, as local magnates likeAnkhtiﬁ began transferring their powers to their offspring and extendedfamilies. Aristocracy and personal politics had no such recognized place inthe Old Kingdom, precisely because they came into conﬂict with theprinciple of sovereignty. In summary, the transition from Old Kingdom toFirst Intermediate period was not so much a shift from ‘order’ to ‘chaos’ –as Egyptological orthodoxy once had it – as a swing from ‘sovereignty’ to‘charismatic politics’ as different ways of framing the exercise of power.With that came a shift in emphasis, from the people’s care of god-like rulersto the care of the people as a legitimate path to authority. In ancient Egypt,as so often in history, signiﬁcant political accomplishments occur inprecisely those periods (the so-called ‘dark ages’) that get dismissed oroverlooked because no one was building grandiose monuments in stone. 
IN WHICH WE GO IN SEARCH OF THE REAL ORIGINS OF BUREAUCRACY, AND FIND THEM ON WHAT APPEARS TO BEA SURPRISINGLY SMALL SCALE 
At this point it should be easy enough to understand why ancient Egypt isso regularly held out as the paradigmatic example of state formation. It’snot just that it is chronologically the earliest of what we’ve called second-order regimes of domination; aside from the much later Inca Empire, it’salso just about the only case where the two principles that came togetherwere sovereignty and administration. In other words, it’s the only case froma suitably distant phase of history that perfectly ﬁts the model of whatshould have happened. All such assumptions really go back to a certainkind of social theory – or, maybe better put, a theory of organization – thatwe described at the start of Chapter Eight. Small, intimate groups (theargument goes) might be able to adopt informal, egalitarian means ofproblem-solving, but as soon as large numbers of people are assembledtogether in a city or a kingdom everything changes.
It’s simply assumed, in this kind of theory, that once societies scale upthey will need, as Robin Dunbar puts it, ‘chiefs to direct, and a police forceto ensure that social rules are adhered to’; or as Jared Diamond says, ‘largepopulations can’t function without leaders who make the decisions,executives who carry out the decisions, and bureaucrats who administer the decisions and laws.’115 In other words, if you want to live in a large-scalesociety you need a sovereign and an administration. It is more or less takenfor granted that some kind of monopoly of coercive force (again, the abilityto threaten everyone with weapons) is ultimately required in order to dothis. Writing systems, in turn, are almost invariably assumed to havedeveloped in the service of impersonal bureaucratic states, which were theresult of the whole process.
Now, as we’ve already seen, none of this is really true, and predictionsbased on these assumptions almost invariably turn out to be wrong. We sawone dramatic example in Chapter Eight. It was once widely assumed that ifbureaucratic states tend to arise in areas with complex irrigation systems, itmust have been because of the need for administrators to co-ordinate the maintenance of canals and regulate the water supply. In fact, it turns out thatfarmers are perfectly capable of co-ordinating very complicated irrigationsystems all by themselves, and there’s little evidence, in most cases, thatearly bureaucrats had anything to do with such matters. Urban populationsseem to have a remarkable capacity for self-governance in ways which,while usually not quite ‘egalitarian’, were likely a good deal moreparticipatory than almost any urban government today. Meanwhile mostancient emperors, as it turns out, saw little reason to interfere, as theysimply didn’t care very much about how their subjects cleaned the streets ormaintained their drainage ditches.
We’ve also observed that when early regimes do base their dominationon exclusive access to forms of knowledge, these are often not the kinds ofknowledge we ourselves would consider particularly practical (theshamanic, psychotropic revelations that seem to have inspired the buildersof Chavín de Huántar would be one such example). In fact, the ﬁrst formsof functional administration, in the sense of keeping archives of lists,ledgers, accounting procedures, overseers, audits and ﬁles, seem to emergein precisely these kinds of ritual contexts: in Mesopotamian temples,Egyptian ancestor cults, Chinese oracle readings and so forth.116 So one thing we can now say with a fair degree of certainty is that bureaucracy didnot begin simply as a practical solution to problems of informationmanagement, when human societies advanced beyond a particular thresholdof scale and complexity.
This, however, raises the interesting question of where and when suchtechnologies did ﬁrst arise, and for what reason. Here there’s some surprising new evidence too. Our emerging archaeological understandingsuggests that the ﬁrst systems of specialized administrative control actuallyemerged in very small communities. The earliest clear evidence of thisappears in a series of tiny prehistoric settlements in the Middle East, datingover 1,000 years after the Neolithic site of Çatalhöyük was founded (ataround 7400 BC), but still more than 2,000 years before the appearance ofanything even vaguely resembling a city. 
The best example of such a site is Tell Sabi Abyad, investigated by a teamof Dutch archaeologists working in Syria’s Balikh valley in the province ofRaqqa. Around 8,000 years ago (c.6200 BC), in what was prehistoricMesopotamia, a one-hectare village was destroyed there by ﬁre, baking itsmud walls and many of their clay contents, thus preserving them. Whileobviously a very bad bit of luck for the inhabitants, it was a stroke ofbrilliant luck for future researchers, since it has left us a unique insight intothe organization of a Late Neolithic community, comprising perhaps around150 individuals.117 What the excavators discovered is that not only did theinhabitants of this village erect central storage facilities, including granariesand warehouses; they also employed administrative devices of somecomplexity to keep track of what was in them. These devices includedeconomic archives, which were miniature precursors to the temple archivesat Uruk and other later Mesopotamian cities.
These were not written archives: writing, as such, would not appear foranother 3,000 years. What did exist were geometric tokens made of clay, ofa sort that appear to have been used in many similar Neolithic villages,most likely to keep track of the allocation of particular resources.118 At Tell Sabi Abyad, miniature seals bearing engraved designs were used alongsidethem to stamp and mark the clay stoppers of household vessels withidentifying signs.119 Perhaps most remarkably, the stoppers themselves,once removed from the vessels, were kept and archived in a special building
– an ofﬁce or bureau of sorts – near the centre of the village for laterreference.120 Ever since these discoveries were reported in the 1990s,archaeologists have been debating in whose interests and for what purposesuch ‘village bureaucracies’ functioned.
In trying to answer this question, it’s important to note that the centralbureau and depot of Tell Sabi Abyad is not associated with any kind ofunusually large residence, rich burials or other signs of personal status. If anything, what’s striking about the remains of this community is theiruniformity: the surrounding dwellings, for instance, are all roughly equal insize, quality and surviving contents. The contents themselves suggest smallfamily units which maintained a complex division of labour, often includingtasks that would have required the co-operation of multiple households.Flocks had to be pastured, a variety of cereal crops sown, harvested andthreshed, as well as ﬂax for weaving, which was practised alongside otherhousehold crafts such as potting, bead-making, stone-carving and simpleforms of metalworking. And of course there were children to raise, oldpeople to care for, houses to build and maintain, marriages and funerals toco-ordinate, and so on.
Careful scheduling and mutual aid would have been vital for thesuccessful completion of an annual round of productive activities, whileevidence of obsidian, metals and exotic pigments indicates that villagersalso interacted regularly with outsiders, no doubt through intermarriage aswell as travel and trade.121 As we’ve already observed in the case oftraditional Basque villages, these sorts of activity could well involve quitecomplicated mathematical calculations. Still, this in itself doesn’t explainwhy there was a need to fall back on precise systems of measurement andarchiving. After all, there are untold thousands of agricultural communitiesacross human history who juggled similarly complex combinations of tasksand responsibilities without having to create new techniques of record-keeping.
Whatever the reason, the effect of introducing such techniques seems tohave been profound for villages in prehistoric Mesopotamia and thesurrounding hill country. Recall that 2,000 years separate Tell Sabi Abyadfrom the earliest cities, and during that long span of time village life in theMiddle East underwent a series of remarkable changes. In some ways,people living in small-scale communities began to act as if they werealready living in mass societies of a certain kind, even though nobody hadever seen a city. It sounds counter-intuitive – but it is what we see in theintervening centuries in the evidence of villages scattered across a largeregion, from southwestern Iran through much of Iraq and all the way overto the Turkish highlands. In many ways this phenomenon was anotherversion of the kind of ‘culture areas’ or hospitality zones that we discussedin earlier chapters, but there was a different element: afﬁnities betweendistant households and families seem to have been increasingly based on a 
principle of cultural uniformity. In a sense, then, this was the ﬁrst era of the‘global village’.122 

What it all looks like, in the archaeological record, is impossible to miss.We write from ﬁrst-hand experience here, since one of us has conductedarchaeological investigations of prehistoric villages in Iraqi Kurdistan,dating before and after the great transformation took place. What you ﬁnd,in the ﬁfth millennium BC, is the gradual disappearance from village life ofmost outward signs of difference or individuality, as administrative toolsand other new media technologies spread across a large swathe of theMiddle East. Households were now built to increasingly standard tripartiteplans, and pottery, which had once been a way of expressing individual skilland creativity, now seems to have been made deliberately drab, uniform andin some cases almost standardized. Craft production in general becamemore mechanical, and female labour was subject to new forms of spatialcontrol and segregation.123 

In fact this entire period, lasting around 1,000 years (archaeologists call itthe ‘Ubaid, after the site of Tell al-‘Ubaid in southern Iraq), was one ofinnovation in metallurgy, horticulture, textiles, diet and long-distance trade;but from a social vantage point, everything seems to have been done toprevent such innovations becoming markers of rank or individualdistinction – in other words, to prevent the emergence of obviousdifferences in status, both within and between villages. Intriguingly, it ispossible that we are witnessing the birth of an overt ideology of equality inthe centuries prior to the emergence of the world’s ﬁrst cities, and thatadministrative tools were ﬁrst designed not as a means of extracting andaccumulating wealth but precisely to prevent such things fromhappening.124 To get a sense of how such small-scale bureaucracies mighthave worked in practice we can brieﬂy consider again the ayllu, thoseAndean village associations which, as we mentioned earlier, had their ownhome-grown administration.
Ayllu too were based on a strong principle of equality; their membersliterally wore uniforms, with each valley having its own traditional designof cloth. One of the ayllu’s main functions was to redistribute agriculturalland as families grew larger or smaller, to ensure none grew richer than anyother – indeed, to be a ‘rich’ household meant, in practice, to have a largenumber of unmarried children, hence much land, since there was no otherbasis for comparing wealth.125 
Ayllu also helped families avoid seasonal labour crunches and kept track of the number of able-bodied young menand women in each household, so as to ensure not only that none wereshort-handed at critical moments, but also that the aged or inﬁrm, widows,orphans or disabled were taken care of.
Between households, responsibilities came down to a principle ofreciprocity: records were kept and at the end of each year all outstandingcredits and debts were to be cancelled out. This is where the ‘villagebureaucracy’ comes in. To do that meant units of work had to be measuredin a way which allowed clear resolution to the inevitable arguments thatcrop up in such situations – about who did what for whom, and who owedwhat to whom.126 Each ayllu appears to have had its own khipu strings,which were constantly knotted and re-knotted to keep track as debts wereregistered or cancelled out. It’s possible that khipu were invented for such purposes. In other words, although the actual administrative tools used weredifferent, the reason for their existence was quite similar to what weenvisage for the village accounting systems in prehistoric Mesopotamia,and rooted in a similarly explicit ideal of equality.127 

Of course, the danger of such accounting procedures is that they can beturned to other purposes: the precise system of equivalence that underliesthem has the potential to give almost any social arrangement, even thosefounded on arbitrary violence (e.g. ‘conquest’), an air of even-handednessand equity. That is why sovereignty and administration make such apotentially lethal combination, taking the equalizing effects of the latter andtransforming them into tools of social domination, even tyranny.
Under the Inca, let’s recall, all ayllus were reduced to the status of ‘conquered women’ and khipu strings were employed to keep track oflabour debts owed to the central Inca administration. Unlike the local stringrecords, these were ﬁxed and non-negotiable; the knots were neverunravelled and retied. Here it is necessary to overcome a few myths aboutthe Inca, who are often portrayed as the mildest of empires – even a kind ofbenevolent proto-socialist state. In fact, it was the pre-existing ayllu systemthat continued to provide social security under Inca rule. By contrast, theoverarching administrative structure put in place by the Inca court waslargely extractive and exploitative in nature (even if local ofﬁcers of thecourt preferred to misrepresent it as an extension of ayllu principles): forpurposes of central monitoring and recording, households were groupedinto units of 10, 50, 100, 500, 1,000, 5,000 and so on, each responsible for 
labour obligations over and above those they already owed to theircommunity, in a way that could only play havoc with existing allegiances,geography and communal organization.128 Corvée duties were assigneduniformly according to a rigid scale of measurement; work tasks mightsimply be invented if there was nothing that needed doing; scofﬂaws facedsevere punishment.129 

The results were predictable, and we can see them clearly reﬂected in theﬁrst-hand accounts supplied by Spanish chroniclers of the time, who tookan obvious interest in Inca strategies of conquest and domination and theirlocal workings. Community leaders became de facto state agents, and eithertook advantage of legalisms to get rich or tried to shield their wards andthemselves if they got in to trouble. Those who were unable to meet labourdebts or who tried unsuccessfully to ﬂee or rebel, were reduced to the statusof servants, retainers and concubines for Inca courts and ofﬁcials.130 This new class of hereditary peons was growing rapidly at the time of Spanishconquest.
None of which is to say the Inca reputation as adept administrators isunfounded. They apparently were capable of keeping exact track of birthsand deaths, adjusting household numbers at yearly festivals and so on. Why,then, impose such an oddly clumsy and monolithic system on to an existingone (the ayllu) which was clearly more nuanced? It’s hard to escape theimpression that in all such situations, the apparent heavy-handedness, theinsistence on following the rules even when they make no sense, is reallyhalf the point. Perhaps this is simply how sovereignty manifests itself, inbureaucratic form. By ignoring the unique history of every household, eachindividual, by reducing everything to numbers one provides a language ofequity – but simultaneously ensures that there will always be some who failto meet their quotas, and therefore that there will always be a supply ofpeons, pawns or slaves.
In the Middle East, very similar things appear to have happened in laterperiods of history. Most famously, perhaps, the books of the Prophets in theHebrew Bible preserve memories of powerful protests that ensued asdemands for tribute drove farmers into penury, forced them to pawn theirﬂocks and vineyards, and ultimately surrender their children into debtpeonage. Or wealthy merchants and administrators took advantage of cropfailures, ﬂoods, natural disasters or neighbours’ simple bad luck to offerinterest-bearing loans that led to the same results. Similar complaints are recorded in China and India as well. The ﬁrst establishment of bureaucratic empires is almost always accompanied by some kind of system ofequivalence run amok. This is not the place to outline a history of moneyand debt131 – only to note that it’s no coincidence that societies like thoseof Uruk-period Mesopotamia were, simultaneously, commercial andbureaucratic. Both money and administration are based on similarprinciples of impersonal equivalence. What we wish to emphasize at thispoint is how frequently the most violent inequalities seem to arise, in theﬁrst instance, from such ﬁctions of legal equality. All citizens of a city, orall worshippers of its god, or all subjects of its king were consideredultimately the same – at least in that one speciﬁc way. The same laws, thesame rights, the same responsibilities applied to all of them, whether asindividuals or, in later and more patriarchal times, as families under theaegis of some paterfamilias. 
What’s important here is the fact that this equality could be viewed asmaking people (as well as things) interchangeable, which in turn allowedrulers, or their henchmen, to make impersonal demands that took noconsideration of their subjects’ unique situations. This is of course whatgives the word ‘bureaucracy’ such distasteful associations almosteverywhere today. The very term evokes mechanical stupidity. But there’sno reason to believe that impersonal systems were originally, or arenecessarily, stupid. If the calculations of a Bolivian ayllu or Basque council– or presumably a Neolithic village administration like that of Tell SabiAbyad, and its urban successors in Mesopotamia – produced an obviouslyimpossible or unreasonable result, matters could always be adjusted. Asanyone knows who has spent time in a rural community, or serving on amunicipal or parish council of a large city, resolving such inequities mightrequire many hours, possibly days of tedious discussion, but almost alwaysa solution will be arrived at that no one ﬁnds entirely unfair. It’s the additionof sovereign power, and the resulting ability of the local enforcer to say,‘Rules are rules; I don’t want to hear about it’ that allows bureaucraticmechanisms to become genuinely monstrous. 
Over the course of this book we have had occasion to refer to the three primordial freedoms, those which for most of human history were simplyassumed: the freedom to move, the freedom to disobey and the freedom tocreate or transform social relationships. We also noted how the English word ‘free’ ultimately derives from a Germanic term meaning ‘friend’ –since, unlike free people, slaves cannot have friends because they cannotmake commitments or promises. The freedom to make promises is aboutthe most basic and minimal element of our third freedom, much asphysically running away from a difﬁcult situation is the most basic elementof the ﬁrst. In fact, the earliest word for ‘freedom’ recorded in any humanlanguage is the Sumerian term ama(r)-gi, which literally means ‘return tomother’ – because Sumerian kings would periodically issue decrees of debtfreedom, cancelling all non-commercial debts and in some cases allowingthose held as debt peons in their creditors’ households to return home totheir kin.132 

One might ask, how could that most basic element of all humanfreedoms, the freedom to make promises and commitments and thus buildrelationships, be turned into its very opposite: into peonage, serfdom orpermanent slavery? It happens, we’d suggest, precisely when promisesbecome impersonal, transferable – in a nutshell, bureaucratized. It is one ofhistory’s great ironies that Madame de Grafﬁgny’s notion of the Inca stateas a model of a benevolent, bureaucratic order actually derives from amisreading of the sources, if a very common one: mistaking the socialbeneﬁts of local, self-organized administrative units (ayllu) for an imperial,Inca structure of command, which in reality served almost exclusively toprovision the army, priesthood and administrative classes.133 
Mesopotamian and later Chinese kings also tended to represent themselves,like the Egyptian nomarchs, as protectors of the weak, feeders of thehungry, solace of widows and orphans.
As money is to promises, we might say, state bureaucracy is to theprinciple of care: in each case we ﬁnd one of the most fundamental buildingblocks of social life corrupted by a conﬂuence of maths and violence. 
IN WHICH, ARMED WITH NEW KNOWLEDGE, WE RETHINKSOME BASIC PREMISES OF SOCIAL EVOLUTION 
Social scientists and political philosophers have been debating the ‘originsof the state’ for well over a century. These debates are never resolved andare unlikely ever to be. At this point, at least we can understand why. Muchlike the search for the ‘origins of inequality’, seeking the origins of the stateis little more than chasing a phantasm. As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, it never occurred to Spanish conquistadors to ask whether or notthey were dealing with ‘states’ since the concept didn’t really exist at thetime. The language they used, of kingdoms, empires and republics, servesjust as well, and in many ways rather better.
Historians, of course, still speak of kingdoms, empires and republics. Ifsocial scientists have come to prefer the language of ‘states’ and ‘stateformation’ it’s largely because this is taken to be more scientiﬁc – despitethe lack of consistent deﬁnition. It’s not clear why. Part of the reason mightbe that the notions of ‘the state’ and of modern science both emergedaround the same time and were to a certain degree entangled with oneanother. Whatever the cause, because the existing literature is sorelentlessly focused on a single narrative of increasing complexity,hierarchy and state formation, it becomes very difﬁcult to use the term‘state’ for any other purpose.
The fact that our planet is, at the present time, almost entirely covered bystates obviously makes it easy to write as if such an outcome wasinevitable. Yet our present situation regularly leads people to make‘scientiﬁc’ assumptions about how we got here that have almost nothing todo with the actual data. Certain salient features of current arrangements arejust projected backwards, presumed to exist once society has attained acertain degree of complexity – unless deﬁnitive evidence of their absencecan be produced.
For example, it is often simply assumed that states begin when certainkey functions of government – military, administrative and judicial – passinto the hands of full-time specialists. This makes sense if you accept thenarrative that an agricultural surplus ‘freed up’ a signiﬁcant portion of thepopulation from the onerous responsibility of securing adequate amounts offood: a story that suggests the beginning of a process that would lead to ourcurrent global division of labour. Early states might have used this surpluslargely to support full-time bureaucrats, priests, soldiers and the like, but –we are always reminded – its existence also allowed for full-time sculptors,poets and astronomers.
It’s a compelling story. It is also quite true when applied to our present-day situation (at least, only a small percentage of us are now involved in theproduction and distribution of foodstuffs). However, almost none of theregimes we’ve been considering in this chapter were actually staffed byfull-time specialists. Most obviously, none seem to have had a standing army. Warfare was largely a business for the agricultural off-season. Priestsand judges rarely worked full-time either; in fact, most governmentinstitutions in Old Kingdom Egypt, Shang China, Early DynasticMesopotamia or for that matter classical Athens were staffed by a rotatingworkforce whose members had other lives as managers of rural estates,traders, builders or any number of different occupations.134 

One could go further. It’s not clear to what degree many of these ‘earlystates’ were themselves largely seasonal phenomena (recall that, at least asfar back as the Ice Age, seasonal gatherings could be stages for theperformance of something that looks to us a bit like kingship; rulers heldcourt only during certain periods of the year; and some clans or warriorsocieties were given state-like police powers only during the wintermonths).135 Like warfare, the business of government tended toconcentrate strongly upon certain times of year: there were months full ofbuilding projects, pageants, festivals, census-taking, oaths of allegiance,trials and spectacular executions; and other times when a king’s subjects(and sometimes even the king himself) scattered to attend to the moreurgent needs of planting, harvesting and pasturage. This doesn’t mean thesekingdoms weren’t real: they were capable of mobilizing, or for that matterkilling and maiming, thousands of human beings. It just means that theirreality was, in effect, sporadic. They appeared and then dissolved away.
Could it be that, in the same way that play farming – our term for thoseloose and ﬂexible methods of cultivation which leave people free to pursueany number of other seasonal activities – turned into more seriousagriculture, play kingdoms began to take on more substance as well? Theevidence from Egypt might be interpreted along these lines. But it’s alsopossible that both these processes, when they did happen, were ultimatelydriven by something else, such as the emergence of patriarchal relations andthe decline of women’s power within the household. Surely these are thekinds of questions we should be asking. Ethnography also teaches us thatkings are rarely content with the idea of being a sporadic presence in mostof their subjects’ lives. Even rulers of kingdoms that nobody woulddescribe as a state, like the Shilluk reth or rulers of minor principalities inJava or Madagascar, would try to insert themselves into the rhythms ofordinary social life by insisting that no one can swear an oath, or marry, oreven greet one another without invoking their name. In this manner, theking would become the necessary means by which his subjects established relations with each other, in much the same way as later heads of statewould insist on putting their faces on money.
In 1852 the Wesleyan minister and missionary Richard B. Lyth describedhow in the Fijian kingdom of Cakaudrove there was a daily rule of absolutesilence at sunrise. Then the king’s herald would proclaim that he was aboutto chew his kava root, whereon all his subjects shouted, ‘Chew it!’ This wasfollowed by a thunderous roar when the ritual was completed. The ruler wasthe Sun, who gave both life and order to his people. He recreated theuniverse each day. In fact, most scholars nowadays insist this king wasn’teven a king, but merely the head of a ‘confederacy of chiefdoms’ who ruledover perhaps a few thousand people. Such cosmic claims are regularlymade in royal ritual almost everywhere in the world, and their grandeurseems to bear almost no relation to a ruler’s actual power (as in their abilityto make anyone do anything they don’t want to do). If ‘the state’ meansanything, it refers to precisely the totalitarian impulse that lies behind allsuch claims, the desire effectively to make the ritual last forever.136 

Monuments like the Egyptian pyramids seem to have served a similarpurpose. They were attempts to make a certain kind of power seem eternal
– the kind that only really manifested itself in those particular months whenpyramid construction was under way. Inscriptions or objects designed toproject an image of cosmic power – palaces, mausoleums, lavish stelae withgodlike ﬁgures announcing laws or boasting of their conquests – areprecisely the ones most likely to endure, thereby forming the core of theworld’s major heritage sites and museum collections today. Such is theirpower that even now we risk falling under their spell. We don’t really knowhow seriously to take them. After all, the Fijian subjects of the King ofCakaudrove must at least have been willing to play along with the dailysunrise ritual, since he lacked much in the way of means to compel them.Yet rulers such as Sargon the Great of Akkad or the First Emperor of Chinahad many such means at their disposal, and as a result we can say even lessabout what their subjects really made of their more grandiose claims.137 

To understand the realities of power, whether in modern or ancientsocieties, is to acknowledge this gap between what elites claim they can doand what they are actually able to do. As the sociologist Philip Abramspointed out long ago, failure to make this distinction has led social scientistsup countless blind alleys, because the state is ‘not the reality which standsbehind the mask of political practice. It is itself the mask which prevents our seeing political practice as it is.’ To understand the latter, he argued, wemust attend to ‘the senses in which the state does not exist rather than to those in which it does’.138 We can now see that these points apply just asforcefully to ancient political regimes as they do to modern ones – if not more so. 
An origin for ‘the state’ has long been sought in such diverse places asancient Egypt, Inca Peru and Shang China, but what we now regard asstates turn out not to be a constant of history at all; not the result of a longevolutionary process that began in the Bronze Age, but rather a conﬂuenceof three political forms – sovereignty, administration and charismaticcompetition – that have different origins. Modern states are simply one wayin which the three principles of domination happened to come together, butthis time with a notion that the power of kings is held by an entity called‘the people’ (or ‘the nation’), that bureaucracies exist for the beneﬁt of said‘people’, and in which a variation on old, aristocratic contests and prizeshas come to be relabelled as ‘democracy’, most often in the form ofnational elections. There was nothing inevitable about it. If proof of thatwere required, we need only observe how much this particular arrangementis currently coming apart. As we noted, there are now planetarybureaucracies (public and private, ranging from the IMF and WTO to J. P.Morgan Chase and various credit-rating agencies) without anything thatresembles a corresponding principle of global sovereignty or global ﬁeld ofcompetitive politics; and everything from cryptocurrencies to privatesecurity agencies, undermining the sovereignty of states.
If anything is clear by now it’s this. Where we once assumed‘civilization’ and ‘state’ to be conjoined entities that came down to us as ahistorical package (take it or leave it, forever), what history nowdemonstrates is that these terms actually refer to complex amalgams ofelements which have entirely different origins and which are currently inthe process of drifting apart. Seen this way, to rethink the basic premises ofsocial evolution is to rethink the very idea of politics itself. 
CODA: ON CIVILIZATION, EMPTY WALLS AND HISTORIESSTILL TO BE WRITTEN 
On reﬂection, it’s odd that the term ‘civilization’ – one we’ve not discussedmuch until now – ever came to be used this way in the ﬁrst place. When people talk about ‘early civilizations’ they are mostly referring to those verysame societies we’ve been describing in this chapter and their directsuccessors: Pharaonic Egypt, Inca Peru, Aztec Mexico, Han China, ImperialRome, ancient Greece, or others of a certain scale and monumentality. Allthese were deeply stratiﬁed societies, held together mostly by authoritariangovernment, violence and the radical subordination of women. Sacriﬁce, aswe’ve seen, is the shadow lurking behind this concept of civilization: thesacriﬁce of our three basic freedoms, and of life itself, for the sake ofsomething always out of reach – whether that be an ideal of world order, theMandate of Heaven or blessings from insatiable gods. Is it any wonder thatin some circles the very idea of ‘civilization’ has fallen into disrepute?Something very basic has gone wrong here.
One problem is that we’ve come to assume that ‘civilization’ refers, inorigin, simply to the habit of living in cities. Cities, in turn, were thought toimply states. But as we’ve seen, that is not the case historically, or evenetymologically.139 The word ‘civilization’ derives from Latin civilis, whichactually refers to those qualities of political wisdom and mutual aid thatpermit societies to organize themselves through voluntary coalition. In otherwords, it originally meant the type of qualities exhibited by Andean aylluassociations or Basque villages, rather than Inca courtiers or Shang dynasts.If mutual aid, social co-operation, civic activism, hospitality or simplycaring for others are the kind of things that really go to make civilizations,then this true history of civilization is only just starting to be written.
As we saw in Chapter Five, Marcel Mauss took some initial, furtive stepsin that direction but was largely ignored; and, as he anticipated, such ahistory might well begin with those geographically expansive ‘cultureareas’ or ‘interaction spheres’ that archaeologists can now trace back intoperiods far earlier than kingdoms or empires, or even cities. As we’ve seen,physical evidence left behind by common forms of domestic life, ritual andhospitality shows us this deep history of civilization. In some ways it’smuch more inspiring than monuments. Arguably, the most importantﬁndings of modern archaeology are precisely these vibrant and far-ﬂungnetworks of kinship and commerce, where those who rely largely onspeculation have expected to ﬁnd only backward and isolated ‘tribes’.
As we’ve been showing throughout this book, in all parts of the worldsmall communities formed civilizations in that true sense of extended moral communities. Without permanent kings, bureaucrats or standing armies they fostered the growth of mathematical and calendrical knowledge. In someregions they pioneered metallurgy, the cultivation of olives, vines and datepalms, or the invention of leavened bread and wheat beer; in others theydomesticated maize and learned to extract poisons, medicines and mind-altering substances from plants. Civilizations, in this true sense, developedthe major textile technologies applied to fabrics and basketry, the potter’swheel, stone industries and beadwork, the sail and maritime navigation, and so on. 
A moment’s reﬂection shows that women, their work, their concerns andinnovations are at the core of this more accurate understanding ofcivilization. As we saw in earlier chapters, tracing the place of women insocieties without writing often means using clues left, quite literally, in thefabric of material culture, such as painted ceramics that mimic both textiledesigns and female bodies in their forms and elaborate decorativestructures. To take just two examples, it’s hard to believe that the kind ofcomplex mathematical knowledge displayed in early Mesopotamiancuneiform documents or in the layout of Peru’s Chavín temples sprang fullyformed from the mind of a male scribe or sculptor, like Athena from thehead of Zeus. Far more likely, these represent knowledge accumulated inearlier times through concrete practices such as the solid geometry andapplied calculus of weaving or beadwork.140 What until now has passed for‘civilization’ might in fact be nothing more than a gendered appropriation –by men, etching their claims in stone – of some earlier system of knowledgethat had women at its centre. 
We began this chapter by noting how often the expansion of ambitiouspolities, and the concentration of power in a few hands, was accompaniedby the marginalization of women, if not their violent subordination. Thisseems to be true not just of second-order regimes like Aztec Mexico andOld Kingdom Egypt but also of ﬁrst-order ones like Chavín de Huántar. Butwhat about cases where, even as societies scaled up and also took on morecentralized forms of government, women and their concerns remained at thecore of things? Do any such exist in history? This brings us to our ﬁnalexample: Minoan Crete. 
Whatever was happening during the Bronze Age on Crete, the largest andmost southerly of the Aegean islands, it clearly doesn’t quite ﬁt thescholarly playbook of ‘state formation’. Yet the remains of what has come to be called Minoan society are too dramatic, too impressive and too closeto the heart of Europe (and what was to become the classical world) to besidelined or ignored. Indeed, in the 1970s the renowned archaeologist ColinRenfrew chose nothing less than The Emergence of Civilisation as the title of his important book on the prehistory of the Aegean, to the eternalconfusion and annoyance of archaeologists working anywhere else.141 
Despite this high proﬁle, and more than a century of intense ﬁeldwork,Minoan Crete remains a kind of beautiful irritant for archaeological theory,and frankly a source of puzzlement to anyone coming at the topic fromoutside. 
Much of our knowledge comes from the metropolis of Knossos, as wellas other major centres at Phaestos, Malia and Zakros, which are usuallydescribed as ‘palatial societies’ that existed between 1700 and 1450 BC (theNeopalatial or ‘New Palace’ period).142 Certainly, they were veryimpressive places at this time. Knossos, thought to have had a population ofabout 25,000,143 in many ways resembles similar cities in other parts of theeastern Mediterranean, centring as it does on large palace complexes repletewith industrial quarters and storage facilities, and a system of writing onclay tablets (‘Linear A’) which, frustratingly, has never been deciphered.The problem is that, unlike palatial societies of roughly the same age – suchas those of Zimri-Lim at Mari on the Syrian Euphrates, or in HittiteAnatolia to the north, or Egypt – there is simply no clear evidence ofmonarchy on Minoan Crete.144 

It’s not for lack of material. We might not be able to read the writing, butCrete and the nearby island of Thera (Santorini) – where a bed of volcanicash preserves the Minoan town of Akrotiri in splendid detail – actuallyfurnish us with one of the most extensive bodies of pictorial art from theBronze Age world: not just frescoes, but also ivories and detailedengravings on seals and jewellery.145 By far the most frequent depictionsof authority ﬁgures in Minoan art show adult women in boldly patternedskirts that extend over their shoulders but are open at the chest.146 Women are regularly depicted at a larger scale than men, a sign of politicalsuperiority in the visual traditions of all neighbouring lands. They holdsymbols of command, like the staff-wielding ‘Mother of Mountains’ whoappears on seal impressions from a major shrine at Knossos; they performfertility rites before horned altars, sit on thrones, meet together inassemblies with no male presiding and appear ﬂanked by supernatural creatures and dangerous animals.147 Most male depictions, on the otherhand, are either of scantily clad or naked athletes (no women are depictednaked in Minoan art); or show men bringing tribute and adopting poses ofsubservience before female dignitaries. All this is without parallel in thehighly patriarchal societies of Syria, Lebanon, Anatolia and Egypt (allregions that Cretans of the time were familiar with, since they visited themas traders and diplomats).
Scholarly interpretations of Minoan palatial art, with its array of powerfulfemales, are somewhat perplexing. Most follow Arthur Evans, the early-twentieth-century excavator of Knossos, in identifying such ﬁgures asgoddesses, or priestesses wielding no earthly power – almost as though theyhave no connection to the real world.148 They tend to come up in the‘religion and ritual’ sections of books on Aegean art and archaeology asopposed to ‘politics’, ‘economics’ or ‘social structure’ – politics, inparticular, being reconstructed with almost no reference to the art at all.Others simply avoid the issue altogether, describing Minoan political life asclearly different, but ultimately impenetrable (a gendered sentiment if everthere was one). Would this keep happening if these were images of men inpositions of authority? Unlikely, since the same scholars usually have notrouble identifying similar scenes that involve males – painted on the wallsof Egyptian tombs, for example – or even actual representations of Keftiu (Cretans) bringing tribute to powerful Egyptian men as reﬂections of realpower relations.
Another puzzling bit of evidence is the nature of the wares that Minoanmerchants imported from abroad. Minoans were a trading people, and thetraders appear to have been mostly men. But starting in the Proto-palatialperiod, what they brought home from overseas had a distinctively femaleﬂavour. Egyptian sistra, cosmetic jars, ﬁgures of nursing mothers and scarabamulets do not come from the male-dominated sphere of courtly culture butthe rituals of non-royal Egyptian women and the gynocentric rites ofHathor. Hathor was celebrated outside Egypt too, in temples near the Sinaiturquoise mines and in maritime ports, where the horned goddess morphedinto a protector of travellers. One such port was Byblos on the Lebanesecoast, where an assemblage of cosmetics and amulets – almost identical tothose from early Cretan tombs – was found buried as offerings in a temple.Most likely, such objects travelled along with women’s cults, perhaps likethe much later cults of Isis, tracking the ‘ofﬁcial’ trade of male elites. The concentration of these items within prestigious Cretan tholos tombs in the period just before the formation of palaces (another of those neglected‘proto-periods’) suggests, at the very least, that women occupied thedemand side of such long-distance exchanges.149 

Again, this was most deﬁnitely not the case elsewhere. To throw thingsinto relief, let’s brieﬂy consider the slightly later palaces of mainlandGreece. 
Cretan palaces were unfortiﬁed, and Minoan art makes almost no referenceto war, dwelling instead on scenes of play and attention to creaturecomforts. All this is in marked contrast to what was happening on the Greekmainland. Walled citadels arose at Mycenae, Pylos and Tiryns around 1400 BC, and before long their rulers launched a successful takeover of Crete,occupying Knossos and assuming control of its hinterland. Compared toKnossos or Phaistos, their residences appear little more than hill forts,perched on key passes in the Peloponnese and surrounded by modesthamlets. Mycenae, the biggest, had a population of around 6,000. This isnot surprising, since the palace societies of the mainland don’t arise frompre-existing cities but from warrior aristocracies that produced the earlierShaft Graves of Mycenae, with their haunting gold death masks andweaponry inlaid with scenes of male ﬁghters and hunting bands.150 

On to this institutional foundation – the warrior band leader and his hunting retinue – were soon added courtly ﬁnery borrowed mainly from theCretan palaces, and a script (Linear B) adapted to write the Greek languagefor administration. Analysis of the Linear B tablets suggests that just ahandful of literate ofﬁcers did most of the administrative work themselves,personally inspecting crops and livestock, gathering taxes, distributing rawmaterials to artisans and supplying provisions for festivals. It was all ratherlimited and small-scale,151 and a Mycenaean wanax (the ruler or overlord)would have exercised little true sovereignty beyond his citadel, making dowith seasonal tax raids on a surrounding populace whose lives otherwisewent on beyond the scope of royal surveillance.152 

These Mycenaean overlords held court in a megaron or great hall, arelatively well-preserved example of which exists at Pylos. Earlyarchaeologists were being a bit fanciful when they imagined this actually tobe the palace of the Homeric king Nestor, but there is no doubt one ofHomer’s kings would have felt quite at home here. The megaron centred on a huge hearth, open to the sky; the remainder of the space, including thethrone, was most likely cast in shadow. The walls bear frescoes showing abull led to slaughter and a bard playing the lyre. The wanax, although notdepicted, is clearly the focus of these processional scenes, which convergeon his throne.153 

We can contrast this with the ‘Throne Room’ of Knossos on Crete,identiﬁed as such by Arthur Evans. In this case the purported throne facesan open space, surrounded by stone benches symmetrically arranged inrows so the assembled groups could sit in comfort for long periods, eachvisible to all the others. Nearby was a stepped bathing chamber. There aremany such ‘lustral basins’ (as Evans called them) in Minoan houses andpalaces. Archaeologists puzzled for decades over their function, until atAkrotiri one such was found directly under a painted scene of a femaleinitiation ceremony most likely linked to menstruation.154 In fact, onpurely architectural grounds, and notwithstanding Evans’s rather desperateinsistence that it ‘seems better adapted for a man’, the centrepiece of theThrone Room may be quite reasonably understood not as the seat of a malemonarch but rather that of a council head, and its occupants more likely asuccession of female councillors. 
Pretty much all the available evidence from Minoan Crete suggests asystem of female political rule – effectively a theocracy of some sort,governed by a college of priestesses. We might ask: why are contemporaryresearchers so resistant to this conclusion? One can’t blame everything onthe fact that proponents of ‘primitive matriarchy’ made exaggerated claimsback in 1902. Yes, scholars tend to say that cities ruled by colleges ofpriestesses are unprecedented in the ethnographic or historical record. Butby the same logic, one could equally point out that there is no parallel for akingdom run by men, in which all the visual representations of authorityﬁgures are depictions of women. Something different was clearly happeningon Crete. 
Certainly, the way in which Minoan artists represented life attests to aprofoundly different sensibility to that of Crete’s neighbours on mainlandGreece. In an essay called ‘The Shapes of Minoan Desire’, Jack Dempseypoints out that erotic attention seems to be displaced from the female bodyon to just about every other facet of life, starting with the lithe, scantily cladﬁgures of young men as they dart in and out of the bodies of bulls whotease them, or gyrate in sporting activities, or the naked boys represented carrying ﬁsh. It’s all a world away from the stiff animal ﬁgures thatpopulate the walls of Pylos, or indeed those of Zimri-Lim’s court, let alonethe scenes of brutal warfare on later Assyrian wall reliefs. In the Minoanfrescoes everything merges – except, that is, for the sharply delineatedﬁgures of those leading females, who stand apart or in small groups,happily chatting with one another or admiring some spectacle. Flowers andreeds, birds, bees, dolphins, even hills and mountains are in the throes of aperpetual dance, weaving in and out of each other.
Minoan objects too bleed into one another in an extraordinary play onmaterials – a true ‘science of the concrete’ – that turns pottery into crustedshell and melds the worlds of stone, metal and clay together into a commonrealm of forms, each mimicking the others.
All this unfolds to the undulating rhythms of the sea, the eternal backdropto this garden of life, and all with a remarkable absence of ‘politics’, in oursense, or what Dempsey calls the ‘self-perpetuating, power-hungry ego’.What these scenes celebrate, as he eloquently puts it, is quite the opposite ofpolitics: it is the ‘ritually induced release from individuality, and an ecstasyof being that is overtly erotic and spiritual at the same time (ek-stasis,“standing beyond oneself”) – a cosmos that both nurtures and ignores theindividual, that vibrates with inseparable sexual energies and spiritualepiphanies’. There are no heroes in Minoan art – only players. Crete of thepalaces was the realm of Homo ludens. Or perhaps, better said, Femina ludens – not to mention Femina potens.155 

What we’ve learned in this chapter can be brieﬂy summarized. The processusually called ‘state formation’ can in fact mean a bewildering number ofvery different things. It can mean a game of honour or chance gone terriblywrong, or the incorrigible growth of a particular ritual for feeding the dead;it can mean industrial slaughter, the appropriation by men of femaleknowledge, or governance by a college of priestesses. But we’ve alsolearned that when studied and compared more closely, the range ofpossibilities is far from limitless.
In fact, there seem to be both logical and historical constraints on thevariety of ways in which power can expand its scope; these limits are thebasis of our ‘three principles’ of sovereignty, administration andcompetitive politics. What we can also see, though, is that – even withinthese constraints – there were far more interesting things going on than we might ever have guessed by sticking to any conventional deﬁnition of ‘thestate’. What was really happening in the Minoan palaces? They seem tohave been in some sense theatrical stages, in some sense women’s initiationsocieties, and administrative hubs all at the same time. Were they even aregime of domination at all?
It’s also important to recall the very uneven nature of the evidence we’vebeen dealing with. What would we be saying about Minoan Crete, orTeotihuacan, or Çatalhöyük for that matter, were it not for the fact that theirelaborate wall paintings happen to have been preserved? More than almostany other form of human activity, painting on walls is something people invirtually any cultural setting seem inclined to do. This has been true almostsince the beginnings of humanity itself. We can hardly doubt that similarimages were produced, on skins and fabrics as well as directly on walls, inany number of so-called ‘early states’ from which only bare stone buildingblocks or mud-brick enclosures now survive. 
Archaeology, using a barrage of new scientiﬁc techniques, willundoubtedly reveal many more such ‘lost civilizations’, as it is already inthe process of doing, from the deserts of Saudi Arabia or Peru to the onceseemingly empty steppes of Kazakhstan and the tropical forests ofAmazonia. As the evidence accumulates, year on year, for large settlementsand impressive structures in previously unsuspected locations, we’d be wiseto resist projecting some image of the modern nation state on to their baresurfaces, and consider what other kinds of social possibilities they mightattest to. 

11 

Full Circle 
On the historical foundations of the indigenous critique 
We appear to have come a long way from where this book began, with theWendat statesman Kandiaronk and the critique of European civilization thatdeveloped among indigenous people in North America during theseventeenth century. Now it’s time to bring the story full circle. Recall how,by the eighteenth century, the indigenous critique – and the deep questionsit posed about money, faith, hereditary power, women’s rights and personalfreedoms – was having an enormous inﬂuence on leading ﬁgures of theFrench Enlightenment, but also resulted in a backlash among Europeanthinkers which produced an evolutionary framework for human history thatremains broadly intact today. Portraying history as a story of materialprogress, that framework recast indigenous critics as innocent children ofnature, whose views on freedom were a mere side effect of theiruncultivated way of life and could not possibly offer a serious challenge tocontemporary social thought (which came increasingly to mean justEuropean thought).1 

In reality, we have not strayed far at all from this starting point, becausethe conventional wisdom we’ve been challenging throughout this book –about hunter-gatherer societies, the consequences of farming, the rise ofcities and states – has its genesis right there: with Turgot, Smith and thereaction against the indigenous critique. Of course, the idea that humansocieties evolved over time was not particularly special to the eighteenthcentury, or to Europe.2 What was new in the version of world history putforward by European writers of that century was an insistence onclassifying societies by means of subsistence (so that agriculture could beseen as a fundamental break in the history of human affairs); an assumptionthat as societies grew larger, they inevitably grew more complex; and that ‘complexity’ means not just a greater differentiation of functions, but alsothe reorganization of human societies into hierarchical ranks, governedfrom the top down.
This European backlash was so effective that generations ofphilosophers, historians, social scientists, and almost anyone else since whowishes to address the human story on a broad scale, feels secure in theirknowledge of how it should properly start and where it is leading. It beginswith an imaginary collection of tiny hunter-gatherer bands and ends withthe current collection of capitalist nation states (or some projection of whatmight come after them). Anything going on in between can be consideredinteresting – mainly insofar as it contributed to moving us all on down thatparticular pathway. As we’ve been discovering, one consequence is thathuge swathes of the human past disappear from the purview of history, orremain effectively invisible (except to the eyes of a tiny number ofresearchers, who rarely explain the implications of their ﬁndings to eachother, let alone to anyone else).
Since the 1980s it has been commonplace for social theorists to claim weare living in a new ‘post-modern’ age, marked by a suspicion towardsmetanarratives. This claim is often used as justiﬁcation for a sort of hyper-specialization: to cast one’s intellectual net wider – to compare notes withcolleagues in other ﬁelds, even – smacks of imposing a single, imperialisticvision of history. For this very reason, the ‘idea of progress’ is usually heldup as a prime example of the way we no longer think about history andsociety. But such claims are odd, since almost everyone making themnonetheless continues to think in evolutionary terms. We could go further:thinkers who do seek to knit together the ﬁndings of specialists, to describethe course of human history on a grand scale, haven’t entirely got past thebiblical notion of the Garden of Eden, the Fall and subsequent inevitabilityof domination. Blinded by the ‘just so’ story of how human societiesevolved, they can’t even see half of what’s now before their eyes.
As a result, the same portrayers of world history who profess themselvesbelievers in freedom, democracy and women’s rights continue to treathistorical epochs of relative freedom, democracy and women’s rights as somany ‘dark ages’. Similarly, as we’ve seen, the concept of ‘civilization’ isstill largely reserved for societies whose deﬁning characteristics includehigh-handed autocrats, imperial conquests and the use of slave labour.Presented with undeniable cases of large and materially sophisticated societies for which evidence of such things is conspicuously lacking –ancient centres like Teotihuacan or Knossos, for example – the standardrecourse is to throw up one’s hands and say: who can tell what was reallygoing on there? or insist that Ozymandias’ throne room must be lurking inthere somewhere, but that we simply haven’t found it yet. 
IN WHICH WE CONSIDER JAMES C. SCOTT’S ARGUMENTS ABOUT THE LAST 5,000 YEARS AND ASK WHETHERCURRENT GLOBAL ARRANGEMENTS WERE, IN FACT,INEVITABLE 
You may object: perhaps much of human history was more complicatedthan we usually admit, but surely what matters is how things ended up. Forat least 2,000 years, most of the world’s population have been living underkings or emperors of one sort or another. Even in places where monarchydid not exist – much of Africa or Oceania, for example – we ﬁnd that (at thevery least) patriarchy, and often violent domination of other sorts, havebeen widespread. Once established, such institutions are very hard to get ridof. So your objection might run: all you’re saying is that the inevitable tooka little longer to happen. That doesn’t make it any less inevitable.
Similarly, with farming. True, your objection might run: agriculturemight not have transformed everything overnight, but surely it laid thegroundwork for later systems of domination? Wasn’t it really just a matterof time? Did not the very possibility of piling up large surpluses of grain, ineffect, lay a trap? Wasn’t it inevitable that, sooner or later, some warrior-prince like Narmer of Egypt would begin amassing stockpiles for hishenchmen? And once he did, surely the game was over. Rival kingdomsand empires would quickly come into being. Some would ﬁnd the means toexpand; they would insist on their subjects producing more and more grain,and those subjects would grow in number, even as the number of remainingfree peoples tended to remain stable. Once again, was it not just a matter oftime before one of those kingdoms (or, as it turned out, a small collection ofthem) came up with a successful formula for world conquest – just the rightcombination of guns, germs and steel – and imposed its system oneverybody else?
James Scott – a renowned political scientist who has devoted much of hiscareer to understanding the role of states (and those who succeed in evading them) in human history – has a compelling description of how thisagricultural trap works. The Neolithic, he suggests, began with ﬂood-retreatagriculture, which was easy work and encouraged redistribution; the largestpopulations were, indeed, concentrated in deltaic environments, but the ﬁrststates in the Middle East (he concentrates largely on these; and China)developed upriver, in areas with an especially strong focus on cerealagriculture – wheat, barley, millet – and relatively limited access to a rangeof other staples. The key to the importance of grain, Scott notes, is that itwas durable, portable, easily divisible and quantiﬁable by bulk, andtherefore an ideal medium to serve as a basis for taxation. Growing aboveground – unlike, say, certain tubers or legumes – grain crops were alsohighly visible and amenable to appropriation. Cereal agriculture did notcause the rise of extractive states, but it was certainly predisposed to theirﬁscal requirements.3 

Like money, grain allows a certain form of terrifying equivalence.Whatever the reasons why it initially became a predominant crop in a givenregion (as we’ve seen – in Egypt for example – this had much to do withchanges in rituals for the dead), once this happened a permanent kingdomcould always emerge. However, Scott also points out that for much ofhistory this process turned out to be a trap for these newfound ‘grain states’as well, limiting them to areas that favoured intensive agriculture, andleaving surrounding highlands, fenlands and marshes largely beyond theirreach.4 What’s more, even within those conﬁnes the grain-based kingdomswere fragile, always prone to collapse under the weight of over-population,ecological devastation and the kind of endemic diseases that always seemedto result when too many humans, domesticated animals and parasitesaccumulated in one place.
Ultimately, though, Scott’s focus isn’t really on states at all: it’s about the‘barbarians’ – a term Scott uses for all those groups which came to surroundthe little islands of authoritarian-bureaucratic rule, and which existed in alargely symbiotic relation with them: some ever-shifting mix of raiding,trading and mutual avoidance. As Scott argued about the hill peoples ofSoutheast Asia, some of these ‘barbarians’ became, effectively, anarchists:organizing their lives in explicit opposition to the valley societies below, orto prevent the emergence of stratiﬁed classes in their own midst. As we’veseen, such conscious rejection of bureaucratic values – another example ofcultural schismogenesis – could also give rise to ‘heroic societies’, a hurly.burly of petty lords whose pre-eminence was founded on dramatic contestsof war, feasting, boasting, duelling, games, gifts and sacriﬁce. Monarchyitself is likely to have started that way, on the fringes of urban-bureaucraticsystems.
But to continue with Scott: barbarian monarchies remained either small-scale or, if they did expand – as was spectacularly the case under ﬁgureslike Alaric, Attila, Genghis or Tamerlane – the expansion was short-lived.Throughout much of history, grain states and barbarians remained ‘darktwins’, locked together in an unresolvable tension, since neither could breakout of their ecological niches. When the states had the upper hand, slavesand mercenaries ﬂowed in one direction; when the barbarians weredominant, tribute ﬂowed to appease the most dangerous warlord; oralternatively, some overlord would manage to organize an effectivecoalition, sweep in on the cities and either lay waste to them, or moretypically, attempt to rule them, and inevitably ﬁnd himself and his retinueabsorbed as a new governing class. As the Mongolian adage went, ‘One canconquer a kingdom on horseback, to rule it one must dismount.’
Scott, though, doesn’t draw any particular conclusions. Rather, he simplyremarks that while the period from about 3000 BC to AD 1600 was a fairlymiserable one for the bulk of the world’s farmers, it was a Golden Age forthe barbarians, who reaped all the advantages of their proximity to dynasticstates and empires (luxuries to loot and plunder), while themselves livingcomparatively easy lives. And it was usually possible for at least some ofthe oppressed to join their ranks. For most of history, he suggests, this iswhat rebellion typically looked like: defection to join the ranks of nearbybarbarians. To put the matter in our own terms, while these agrariankingdoms managed largely to abolish the freedom to ignore orders, they hada much harder time abolishing the freedom to move away. Empires wereexceptional and short-lived, and even the most powerful – Roman, Han,Ming, Inca – could not prevent large-scale movements of people into andout of their spheres of control. Until around a half-millennium ago, a largeproportion of the world’s population still lived either beyond the taxcollector’s purview or within reach of some relatively straightforwardmeans of escaping it.5 

Yet today, in our twenty-ﬁrst-century world, this is obviously no longerthe case. Something did go terribly wrong – at least from the point of viewof the barbarians. We no longer live in that world. But merely recognizing that it existed for so long allows us to pose a further important question.How inevitable, really, were the type of governments we have today, withtheir particular fusion of territorial sovereignty, intense administration andcompetitive politics? Was this really the necessary culmination of humanhistory? 
One problem with evolutionism is that it takes ways of life that developedin symbiotic relation with each other and reorganizes them into separatestages of human history. By the late nineteenth century, it was becomingclear that the original sequence as developed by Turgot and others –hunting, pastoralism, agriculture, then ﬁnally industrial civilization – didn’treally work. Yet at the same time, the publication of Darwin’s theoriesmeant that evolutionism became entrenched as the only possible scientiﬁcapproach to history – or at least the only one likely to be given credence inuniversities. So the search was on for more workable categories. In his 1877Ancient Society, Lewis Henry Morgan proposed a series of steps from‘savagery’ through ‘barbarism’ to ‘civilization’ which was widely adoptedin the new ﬁeld of anthropology. Meanwhile, Marxists concentrated onforms of domination, and the move out of primitive communism towardsslavery, feudalism and capitalism, to be followed by socialism (thencommunism). All these approaches were basically unworkable, andeventually had to be thrown away as well.
Since the 1950s, a body of neo-evolutionist theory has sought to deﬁne anew version of the sequence, based on how efﬁciently groups harvestenergy from their environment.6 As we’ve seen, almost nobody todaysubscribes to this framework in its entirety. Indeed, whole volumes havebeen written taking it to task, or pointing out the many exceptions to itslogic; we are ‘over all that’ and have ‘moved on’ would be the standardreaction of most anthropologists and archaeologists when confronted withsuch an evolutionary scheme today. But if our ﬁelds have moved on, theyhave done so, it seems, without putting any alternative vision in place, theresult being that almost anyone who is not an archaeologist oranthropologist tends to fall back on the older scheme when they set out tothink or write about world history on a large canvas. For this reason it mightbe useful to summarize the older scheme’s basic sequence here: Band societies: the simplest stage is still assumed to be made up of hunter-gatherers like the !Kung or Hadza, supposedly living in small mobilegroups of twenty to forty individuals, without any formal political roles andminimal division of labour. Such societies are thought to be egalitarian,effectively by default. 
Tribes: societies like the Nuer, Dayaks or Kayapo. Tribesmen are typicallyassumed to be ‘horticulturalists’, which is to say they farm but don’t createirrigation works or use heavy equipment like ploughs; they are egalitarian,at least among those of the same age and gender; their leaders have onlyinformal, or at least no coercive, power. ‘Tribes’ are typically arranged intothe sort of complex lineage or totemic clan structures beloved ofanthropologists. Economically, the central ﬁgures are ‘big men’ – such aswere typically found in Melanesia – responsible for creating voluntarycoalitions of contributors to sponsor rituals and feasts. Ritual or craftspecialism is limited and usually part-time; tribes are numerically largerthan bands, but settlements tend to be roughly of the same size andimportance. 
Chiefdoms: while the clans of tribal society are all, ultimately, equivalent,in chiefdoms the kinship system becomes the basis for a system of rank,with aristocrats, commoners and even slaves. The Shilluk, Natchez orCalusa are typically treated as chiefdoms; so are, say, Polynesian kingdoms,or the lords of ancient Gaul. Intensiﬁcation of production leads to asigniﬁcant surplus, and classes of full-time craft and ritual specialistsemerge, not to mention the chieﬂy families themselves. There is at least onelevel of settlement hierarchy (the chief’s residence, and everyone else), andthe main economic function of the chief is redistributive: pooling resources,often forcibly, and then doling them out to everyone, usually duringspectacular feasts. 
States: much as already described, these tend to be characterized byintensive cereal agriculture, a legal monopoly on the use of force,professional administration and a complex division of labour. 
As many twentieth-century anthropologists pointed out at the time, thisscheme doesn’t really work either. In reality, ‘big men’ seem almost entirelyconﬁned to Melanesia. ‘Indian chiefs’ such as Geronimo or Sitting Bull were, in fact, tribal headmen, whose role was nothing like big men in PapuaNew Guinea. Most of those labelled ‘chiefs’ in the neo-evolutionist model,as we’ve already noted, look suspiciously like what we normally think of as‘kings’ and may well live in fortiﬁed castles, wear ermine robes, supportcourt jesters, have hundreds of wives and harem eunuchs. However, theyrarely engage in the mass redistribution of resources, at least not in anysystematic way.
The evolutionist response to such critiques was not to abandon thescheme but to ﬁne-tune it. Perhaps chiefdoms are more predatory,evolutionists argued, but they are still fundamentally different to states.What’s more, they can be subdivided between ‘simple’ and ‘complex’chiefdoms: in the former, the chief really was just a gloriﬁed big man, stillworking like everyone else, with only minimal administrative assistance; inthe complex version, he was backed up by at least two levels ofadministrative staff, allowing a genuine class structure. Finally, chiefdoms‘cycled’, which is to say that the simple overlords were constantly, oftenquite methodically, trying to patch together tiny empires by conquering orsubordinating local rivals, so as to catapult themselves towards the nextstage of complexity (characterized by three levels of administrativehierarchy), or even to found states. While a few ambitious chiefs didmanage to pull this off, most failed; they reached their ecological or sociallimits; this rankled with people; the whole jerry-built contraption collapsed,leaving it for some other aspiring dynast to begin trying to conquer theworld – or at least, those parts of it considered worth conquering.
In academic circles, an odd disjuncture has developed around the use ofsuch schemes. Most cultural anthropologists view this kind of evolutionarythinking as a sort of quaint relic from their discipline’s past, which no onetoday could possibly take seriously; while most archaeologists only employterms like ‘tribe’, ‘chiefdom’ or ‘state’ for lack of an alternativeterminology. Yet almost anyone else will treat such schemes as the self-evident basis for all further discussion. Throughout this book, we havespent a good deal of time demonstrating how deceptive all this is. Thereason why these ways of thinking remain in place, no matter how manytimes people point out their incoherence, is precisely because we ﬁnd it sodifﬁcult to imagine history that isn’t teleological – that is, to organizehistory in a way which does not imply that current arrangements weresomehow inevitable. 
As we have already remarked, one of the most puzzling aspects of livingin history is that it’s almost impossible to predict the course of futureevents; yet, once events have happened, it’s difﬁcult to know what it wouldeven mean to say something else ‘could’ have happened. A properlyhistorical event has, perhaps, two qualities: it could not have been predictedbeforehand, but it only happens once. One does not get to ﬁght the Battle ofGaugamela over again, to see what would have happened if Darius hadactually won. Speculating what might have happened – had Alexander, say,been hit by a stray arrow, and there had never been a Ptolemaic Egypt orSeleucid Syria – is at best an idle game. It might raise profound questions –how much difference can an individual really make in history? – butnevertheless, these are questions that cannot ever be deﬁnitively answered.
The best we can do, when confronted with unique historical events orconﬁgurations such as the Persian or Hellenistic empires, is to engage in aproject of comparison. This at least can give us an idea of the sort of thingsthat might happen, and at best a sense of the pattern by which one thing islikely to follow another. The problem is that ever since the Iberian invasionof the Americas, and subsequent European colonial empires, we can’t evenreally do that, because there’s ultimately been just one political-economicsystem and it is global. If we wish, say, to assess whether the modern nationstate, industrial capitalism and the spread of lunatic asylums are necessarilylinked, as opposed to separate phenomena that just happen to have cometogether in one part of the world, there’s simply no basis on which tojudge.7 All three emerged at a time when the planet was effectively a singleglobal system and we have no other planets to compare ourselves to.
One could make the argument – many do – that for most of humanhistory this was already the case. Eurasia and Africa already formed asingle interconnected system. Certainly, people, objects and ideas did moveback and forth across the Indian Ocean and the Silk Roads (or their Bronzeand Iron Age precursors); as a result, dramatic political and economicchanges often appeared to occur in more or less co-ordinated fashion acrossthe Eurasian land mass. To take one famous example: almost a century ago,the German philosopher Karl Jaspers noted that all the major schools ofspeculative philosophy we know today seem to have emerged – apparentlyindependently – in Greece, India and China at roughly the same time,between the eighth and third centuries BC; what’s more, they emerged inprecisely those cities which had recently seen the invention and widespread adoption of coined money. Jaspers called this the Axial Age, a term sinceexpanded by others to include the period that saw the birth of all today’sworld religions, stretching from the Persian prophet Zoroaster (c.800 BC) tothe coming of Islam (c.AD 600). Now, the core period of Jaspers’s AxialAge – encompassing the lifetimes of Pythagoras, the Buddha and Confucius
– corresponds not only to the invention of metal coinage and new forms ofspeculative thought, but also the spread of chattel slavery across Eurasia,even in places where it had barely existed before; moreover, chattel slaverywould eventually fall into decline after a succession of Axial Age empiresdissolved (the Maurya, Han, Parthian, Roman), along with their prevailingsystems of currency.8 Obviously, it would be wrong to say that Eurasia canbe treated as just one place, and therefore to conclude that comparing howthese processes unfolded in different parts of Eurasia is meaningless.Equally, it would be wrong to conclude that such patterns are universalfeatures of human development. They might just be what happened inEurasia. 
Much of Africa, Oceania or northwestern Europe for that matter, was sotied into the great empires of this period – notably with the convergence ofterrestrial and maritime trade routes around the Indian Ocean and Mediterranean in the ﬁfth century BC, but arguably already much earlier –that it’s hard to know whether they can be taken as independent points ofcomparison either. The only real exception were the Americas. Admittedly,even before 1492 there must have been some occasional movement back and forth between the two hemispheres (otherwise there wouldn’t have beena human population in the Americas to begin with); but prior to the Iberianinvasion, the Americas were not in direct or regular communication withEurasia. They were in no sense part of the same ‘world system’. This isimportant, because it means we do have one truly independent point ofcomparison (possibly even two, if we consider North and South America asseparate), where it is possible to ask: does history really have to take acertain direction? 
In the case of the Americas, we actually can pose questions such as: wasthe rise of monarchy as the world’s predominant form of governmentinevitable? Is cereal agriculture really a trap, and can one really say thatonce the farming of wheat or rice or maize becomes sufﬁcientlywidespread, it’s only a matter of time before some enterprising overlordseizes control of the granaries and establishes a regime of bureaucratically administered violence? And once he does, is it inevitable that others willimitate his example? Judging by the history of pre-Columbian NorthAmerica, at least, the answer to all these questions is a resounding ‘no’.
In fact, although archaeologists of North America use the language of‘bands’, ‘tribes’, ‘chiefdoms’ and ‘states,’ what actually seems to havehappened there deﬁes all such assumptions. We’ve already seen how in thewestern half of the continent there was, if anything, a movement away from agriculture in the centuries before the European invasion; and how Plainssocieties often seem to have moved back and forth, over the course of anygiven year, between bands and something that shares at least some of thefeatures we identify with states – in other words, between what should havebeen opposite ends of the scale of social evolution. Even more startling inits own way is what happened in the eastern part of the continent.
From roughly AD 1050 to 1350 there was, in what’s now East St Louis, acity whose real name has been forgotten, but which is known to history asCahokia.9 It appears to have been the capital of what James Scott wouldterm a classic budding ‘grain state’, rising magniﬁcently and seeminglyfrom nowhere, around the time that the Song Dynasty ruled in China andthe Abbasid Caliphate in Iraq. Cahokia’s population peaked at something inthe order of 15,000 people; then it abruptly dissolved. Whatever Cahokiarepresented in the eyes of those under its sway, it seems to have ended upbeing overwhelmingly and resoundingly rejected by the vast majority of itspeople. For centuries after its demise the site where the city once stood, andhundreds of miles of river valleys around it, lay entirely devoid of humanhabitation: a ‘vacant quarter’ (rather like the Forbidden Zone in PierreBoulle’s Planet of the Apes), a place of ruins and bitter memories.10 

Successor kingdoms to Cahokia sprang up to the south but then likewisecrumbled. By the time Europeans arrived on the eastern seaboard of NorthAmerica, ‘Mississippian civilization’ – as it has come to be known – wasbut a distant memory and the descendants of Cahokia’s subjects andneighbours appear to have reorganized themselves into polis-sized tribal republics, in careful ecological balance with their natural environment.What had happened? Were the rulers of Cahokia and other Mississippiancities overthrown by popular uprisings, undermined by mass defection,victims of ecological catastrophe, or (more likely) some intricate mix of allthree? Archaeology may one day supply more deﬁnitive answers. Untilsuch time, what we can say with some conﬁdence is that the societies encountered by European invaders from the sixteenth century onwards werethe product of centuries of political conﬂict and self-conscious debate. Theywere, in many cases, societies in which the ability to engage in self-conscious political debate was itself considered one of the highest humanvalues. 
It is impossible to understand the devotion to individual liberty, or eventhe sceptical rationalism of ﬁgures like Kandiaronk, outside this largerhistorical context; or at least, that is what we propose to show in the rest ofthis chapter. Much though later European authors liked to imagine them asinnocent children of nature, the indigenous populations of North Americawere in fact heirs to their own, long intellectual and political history – onethat had taken them in a very different direction to Eurasian philosophersand which, arguably, ended up having a profound inﬂuence on conceptionsof freedom and equality, not just in Europe but everywhere else as well. 


Of course, we are taught to treat such claims as inherently unlikely, evenslightly preposterous. As we’ve seen in the case of Turgot, evolutionarytheory as we know it today was largely created so as to entrench suchdismissive attitudes: to make them seem natural or obvious. If the indigenous peoples of North America aren’t being imagined as living in aseparate time, or as vestiges of some earlier stage of human history, thenthey’re imagined as living in an entirely separate reality (‘ontology’ is thecurrently fashionable term), a mythic consciousness fundamentally differentfrom our own. If nothing else, it is assumed that any intellectual traditionsimilar to that which produced Plotinus, Shankara or Zhuang Zu can onlybe the product of a literary tradition in which knowledge becomescumulative. And since North America did not produce a written tradition –or at least not the sort we are used to recognizing as such11 – anyknowledge it generated, political or otherwise, was necessarily of a differentkind. Any similarity we might see to debates or positions familiar from ourown intellectual tradition is typically written off as some sort of naiveprojection of Western categories. Real dialogue is thus impossible.
Perhaps the most straightforward way to counteract this sort of argumentis by citing a text, which describes a concept the Wendat (Huron) calledOndinnonk, a secret desire of the soul manifested by a dream: 
Hurons believe that our souls have other desires, which are, as it
were, inborn and concealed … They believe that our soul makes
these natural desires known by means of dreams, which are its
language. Accordingly, when these desires are accomplished, it is
satisﬁed; but, on the contrary, if it be not granted what it desires, it
becomes angry, and not only does not give its body the good and the
happiness that it wished to procure for it, but often it also revolts
against the body, causing various diseases, and even death.12 

The author goes on to explain that, in dreams, such secret desires arecommunicated in a kind of indirect, symbolic language, difﬁcult to understand, and that the Wendat therefore spend a great deal of time tryingto decipher the meaning of one another’s dreams, or consulting specialists.
All this might seem like an oddly clumsy projection of Freudian theory,but for one thing. The text is from 1649. It was written by a certain FatherRagueneau in a Jesuit Relation, precisely 250 years before the appearanceof the ﬁrst edition of Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams (1899), an eventwhich, like Einstein’s theory of relativity, is widely seen as one of thefounding events of twentieth-century thought. What’s more, Ragueneau isnot our only source. Numerous missionaries attempting to convert otherIroquoian peoples at the same time reported similar theories – which theyconsidered absurd and obviously false (though probably, they concluded,not actually demonic) and attempted to refute, in order to bring theirinterlocutors around instead to the truth of Holy Scripture.
Does this mean that the community in which Kandiaronk grew up wascomposed of Freudians? Not exactly. There were signiﬁcant differencesbetween Freudian psychoanalysis and Iroquoian practice, most dramaticallyin the collective nature of the therapy. ‘Dream-guessing’ was often carriedout by groups, and realizing the desires of the dreamer, either literally orsymbolically, could involve mobilizing an entire community: Ragueneaureported that the winter months in a Wendat town were largely devoted toorganizing collective feasts and dramas, literally in order to make someimportant man or woman’s dreams come true. The point here is that itwould be very unwise to dismiss such intellectual traditions as inferior – orfor that matter, entirely alien – to our own.
One thing that makes the Wendat and Haudenosaunee unusual is thattheir traditions are so well documented: many other societies were eitherentirely destroyed, or reduced to traumatized remnants, long before anysuch records could be written down. One can only wonder what otherintellectual traditions might thus have been forever lost. What we are goingto do in the remainder of this chapter, then, is examine the history of theEastern Woodlands of North America from roughly AD 200 to 1600 in exactly this light. Our aim here is to understand the local roots of theindigenous critique of European civilization, and how those roots wereentangled in a history that began at Cahokia or perhaps even considerablyearlier. 
IN WHICH WE ASK HOW MUCH OF NORTH AMERICA CAME TO HAVE A SINGLE UNIFORM CLAN SYSTEM, ANDCONSIDER THE ROLE OF THE ‘HOPEWELL INTERACTION SPHERE’ 
Let’s start with a puzzle. We’ve already had occasion to mention how thesame basic repertoire of clan names could be found distributed more or lesseverywhere across Turtle Island (the indigenous name for the NorthAmerican continent). There were endless local differences, but there werealso consistent alliances, so that it was possible for a traveller hailing from aBear, or Wolf or Hawk clan in what’s now Georgia to travel all the way toOntario or Arizona and ﬁnd someone obliged to host them at almost anypoint in between. This seems all the more remarkable when one considersthat literally hundreds of different languages were spoken in NorthAmerica, belonging to half a dozen completely unrelated language families.It hardly seems likely that clan systems were brought over, fully ﬂedged,with the ﬁrst human arrivals from Siberia; they must have developed inmore recent times. But – and here’s our puzzle – considering the distancesinvolved, it’s hard to imagine how that could have happened.
As Elizabeth Tooker, doyenne of Iroquoian studies, pointed out back inthe 1970s, this puzzle is all the more perplexing because it’s not entirelyclear if North American clans should strictly be considered ‘kinship’ groupsat all. They are more like ritual societies, each dedicated to maintaining aspiritual relation with a different totem animal which is usually onlyﬁguratively their ‘ancestor’. True, members are recruited by (matrilineal orpatrilineal) descent, and fellow clan members consider one another brothersand sisters whom one therefore cannot marry. Yet nobody kept track ofgenealogies, and there were no ancestor cults or property claims based ondescent: all clan members were, effectively, equal. There wasn’t even muchin the way of collective property other than certain forms of ritualknowledge, dances or chants, bundles of sacred objects and also a collectionof names. 
A clan typically had a ﬁxed stock of names which were assigned tochildren. Some of these were chieﬂy names but, like the sacredparaphernalia, they were rarely directly inherited; instead, they wereassigned to the most likely candidate when a title holder died. Acommunity, moreover, was never made up of just one clan. There were usually quite a number, grouped together into two halves (or moieties),which acted as rivals and complements to one another, competing againstone another in sports and burying one another’s dead. The overall effectwas to efface personal histories from public contexts: since names weretitles, it would be as if the head of one half of the community would alwaysbe John F. Kennedy and the other always Richard Nixon. This fusing oftitles and names is a peculiarly North American phenomenon. Some versionof it appears almost everywhere on Turtle Island, but almost nowhere elsein the world do we see anything quite like it.
Finally, Tooker notes, clans played a key role in diplomacy: not just inproviding hospitality to travellers, but organizing the protocol fordiplomatic missions, the paying of compensation to prevent wars, or theincorporation of prisoners, who could simply be assigned a name andthereby become a clan member in their new community – even thereplacement for someone who had died in that very conﬂict. The systemappeared to be designed to maximize people’s capacity to move,individually or collectively, or for that matter to reshufﬂe socialarrangements. Within these parameters there is an endless, almostkaleidoscopic range of possibilities. But where did this set of parameterscome from in the ﬁrst place? Tooker suggested it might be remnants ofsome long-forgotten ‘trading empire’, perhaps originally established bymerchants from central Mexico, but the suggestion wasn’t taken seriouslyby her fellow scholars – her essay, in fact, is hardly ever cited. There is noevidence that any such trading empire ever existed.
It seems more reasonable to assume that a ritual and diplomatic systemhas its origins in, well, ritual and diplomacy. The ﬁrst point where we haveunmistakable evidence that such a phenomenon could have happened – thatis, where active ties developed between virtually all parts of North America
– lies in what archaeologists refer to as the ‘Hopewell Interaction Sphere’, anetwork with its epicentre in the Scioto and Paint Creek river valleys ofOhio. Between roughly 100 BC and AD 500, communities participating inthis network deposited treasures under burial mounds, often piled up inextraordinary quantities. The treasures included quartz-crystal arrowheads,mica and obsidian from the Appalachians, copper and silver from the GreatLakes, conch shells and shark teeth from Gulf of Mexico, grizzly-bearmolars from the Rockies, meteoric iron, alligator teeth, barracuda jaws and more.13 Most of these materials seem to have been used for the manufacture of ritual gear and magniﬁcent costumes – including metal-sheathed pipes and mirrors – worn by shamans, priests and a host of minorofﬁcials in a complex organizational structure, the precise nature of whichis ﬁendishly difﬁcult to reconstruct.
Even more striking, many of these tombs were located in the vicinity ofgigantic earthworks, some literally miles across. The inhabitants of theCentral Ohio valley had been creating such structures since the beginning ofwhat archaeologists called the Adena period, around 1000 BC, andearthworks do also appear in earlier ‘Archaic’ phases of North Americanhistory. As we’ve already seen in the case of Poverty Point, whoeverdesigned them was capable of making remarkably sophisticatedastronomical calculations and employed accurate systems of measurement.One would imagine such people could also marshal and deploy enormousamounts of labour – although here we must be careful. Evidence from morerecent times suggests that the tradition of mound-building could have been,in some cases, a side effect of creating dancing-grounds or other ﬂat openspaces for feasts, games and assemblies. Each year before a major ritualthese spaces would be swept and ﬂattened, and the accumulated dirt anddebris piled up in the same place. Over centuries, this could obviouslybecome a very large amount of material to be shaped. Among theMuskogee, for example, such artiﬁcial hills would be covered each year bya new mantle of red, yellow, black or white earth. This work was organizedby ofﬁcials on rotating duties and did not require top-down structures ofcommand.14 

Such is clearly not the case, however, with really large structures likePoverty Point or the Hopewell earthworks. These did not grow by slowaccretion but were planned in advance. The most impressive sites arealmost invariably in river valleys, typically quite close to bodies of water.They rise, literally, out of the sodden mud. As anyone who has played as achild with sand or mud (that is, pretty much anyone, including ancientAmerindians) will be aware, it’s easy to make structures out of suchmaterial, but almost impossible to keep them from crumbling or washingaway again in damp locations. This is where the really impressiveengineering comes in. A typical Hopewell site is a complex, mathematicallyaligned mix of circles, squares and octagons – all made of mud. One of thelargest, the Newark Earthworks in Licking County, Ohio, which apparentlyfunctioned as a lunar observatory, extends over two square miles and contains embankments more than sixteen feet tall. The only way to createstable structures of this sort – so stable that they still exist today – was bythe use of ingenious building techniques, alternating layers of earth withcarefully selected gravels and sand.15 To anyone seeing them for the ﬁrsttime, rising above the swamps, the effect would be similar to witnessing anice cube that refused ever to melt in the midday sun; a kind of cosmogonicmiracle. 
We’ve already mentioned how researchers calculating the maths werestartled to discover that, from the Archaic phase onwards, geometricearthworks across large parts of the Americas appear to have been using thesame system of measurement: one apparently based on the arrangement ofcords into equilateral triangles. So the fact that people and materials wereconverging from far and wide upon the Hopewell mound complexes is notin itself extraordinary. Yet as archaeologists have also observed, thegeometric systems characteristic of the ‘Woodland peoples’ who createdHopewell also mark something of a break with past custom: theintroduction of a different metrical system, and a new geometry of forms.16 

Central Ohio was just the epicentre. Sites with earthworks based on thisnew, Hopewellian geometrical system can be found dotted along the upperand lower reaches of the Mississippi valley. Some are the size of smalltowns. They might, and often did, contain meeting houses, craft workshopsand charnel houses for the processing of human remains, along with cryptsfor the dead. A few might have had resident caretakers, though this isn’tentirely clear. What is clear is that for most of the year these sites remainedlargely or completely empty. Only on speciﬁc ritual occasions did theycome to life as theatres for elaborate ceremonies, densely populated for aweek or two at a time, with people drawn from across the region andoccasional visitors from very far away.
This is another of the puzzles of Hopewell. It had all the elementsrequired to create a classic ‘grain state’ (as Scott would deﬁne it). TheScioto-Paint Creek bottomlands, where the largest centres were built, are sofertile they later came to be nicknamed ‘Egypt’ by European settlers; and atleast some of the inhabitants will have been familiar with maize cultivation. But in the same way that they appear to have largely avoided this crop –except perhaps for limited, ritual purposes – they also largely avoided thevalley bottoms, preferring to live in isolated homesteads scattered across thelandscape and mostly on higher ground. Such homesteads often consisted of 
a single family; or, at most, three or four. Sometimes these tiny groupsmoved back and forth between summer and winter houses, pursuing acombination of hunting, ﬁshing, foraging and cultivating local weedy cropsin small garden plots; sunﬂowers, sumpweed, goosefoot, knotweed andmaygrass, along with a smattering of vegetables.17 Presumably peoplewere in regular contact with their neighbours. They seem to have got onwith them well enough, since there is little evidence for warfare ororganized violence of any sort.18 But they never came together to createany sort of ongoing village or town life.19 

Monumental architecture on the scale of the Hopewell earthworks isgenerally assumed to imply a signiﬁcant agricultural surplus, governed bychiefs or a stratum of religious leaders. Yet this isn’t what was going on.Rather we ﬁnd just the sort of ‘play farming’ familiar from our discussionsin Chapter Six, as well as shamans and engineers who spent theoverwhelming majority of their time with the same ﬁve or six companions,but who periodically walked out on to the stage of an extended society thatencompassed much of the North American continent. It is all so strikinglydifferent from anything we know of later Woodlands societies that it’sdifﬁcult to reconstruct exactly what these settlement patterns meant inpractice. If nothing else, however, this overall situation illustrates theprofound irrelevance of a conventional evolutionist terminology, based on aprogression from ‘bands’ to ‘tribes’ and ‘chiefdoms’.
So what kind of societies were these? 
One thing we can deﬁnitely say is that they were artistically brilliant. Forall their modest living arrangements, Hopewellians produced one of themost sophisticated repertories of imagery in the pre-Columbian Americas:everything from efﬁgy pipes topped by exquisite animal carvings (used tosmoke a variety of tobacco strong enough to induce trance-like states, alongwith other herbal concoctions); to ﬁred earthen jars covered in elaboratedesigns; and small copper sheets, worn as breastplates, cut into intricategeometrical designs. Much of the imagery is evocative of shamanic ritual,vision quests and soul journeys (as we noted, there is a particular emphasison mirrors), but also periodic festivals of the dead.
Like Chavín de Huántar in the Andes, or indeed Poverty Point, socialinﬂuence derived from control over esoteric forms of knowledge. The maindifference is that the Hopewell Interaction Sphere has no discernible centre,no single capital, and unlike Chavín it offers little evidence for the existence of permanent elites, priestly or otherwise. Analysis of burials reveals atleast a dozen different sets of insignia, ranging perhaps from funerarypriests to clan chief or diviner. Remarkably, it also appears to reveal theexistence of a developed clan system, since the ancient inhabitants ofcentral Ohio developed the historically unusual – but from anarchaeologist’s point of view extraordinarily convenient – habit of includingbits of their totem animal – jaws, teeth, claws or talons, often fashioned intopendants or jewellery – in their tombs. All the clans most familiar fromlater North America – Deer, Wolf, Elk, Hawk, Snake and so on – werealready represented.20 The really striking thing is that, despite the existenceof a system of ofﬁces and clans, there appears to be virtually no relationbetween the two. It is possible that clans sometimes ‘owned’ certain ofﬁces,but there is little evidence for the existence of a hereditary, ranked elite.21 

Some suggest that much of Hopewell ritual consisted of heroic-stylefeasts and contests: races, games and gambling, which – if at all like laterFeasts of the Dead in the American Northeast – often ended by coveringgreat treasures beneath carefully layered strata of soil and gravel, so thatnobody (except, perhaps, gods or spirits) would ever see them again.22 
Both the games and burials would, obviously, tend to militate against theaccumulation of wealth – or, better put, would ensure that social differencesremained largely theatrical. Indeed, even those systemic differences that canbe detected seem to be an effect of the ritual system, for the Hopewellheartland appears to break down into a Tripartite Alliance, three greatclusters of sites. 
In the northernmost, centred on Hopewell itself, funerary assemblagesfocus on shamanic ritual, heroic male ﬁgures travelling between cosmicdomains. In the southern, best exempliﬁed by the Turner Site in southwestOhio, the emphasis is on an imagery of impersonal masked ﬁgures, hilltopearth shrines and chthonic monsters. Still more remarkably, in the northerncluster all those buried with badges of ofﬁce are men; in the southern, thoseburied with the same badges of ofﬁce are just as exclusively women. (Thecentral cluster of sites is mixed, in both respects.)23 What’s more, there wasclearly some kind of systemic co-ordination between the clusters, withcauseways joining them.24 

It’s informative, at this point, to compare and contrast the HopewellInteraction Sphere with a phenomenon we discussed in the previous chapter: the ‘Ubaid village societies of Mesopotamia in the ﬁfth millennium BC. The comparison might seem a stretch, but both can be conceived asculture areas on the grandest possible scale, the ﬁrst in their respectivehemispheres to encompass the entire span of a great river system – theMississippi and the Euphrates respectively – from headwaters to delta,including all the surrounding plains and coastlands.25 The establishment of regular cultural interaction on such a scale, across sharply contrastinglandscapes and environmental niches, often marks an important turningpoint in history. In the case of the ‘Ubaid it created a certain self-consciousform of standardization, a social egalitarianism, that laid foundations for theworld’s ﬁrst cities.26 What happened in the case of Hopewell seems ratherdifferent. 
In fact, in many ways Hopewell and ‘Ubaid are polar cultural opposites.The unity of the ‘Ubaid interaction sphere lay in the suppression ofindividual differences between people and households; in contrast, the unityof Hopewell lay in the celebration of difference. To take one example:while later North American societies would distinguish entire clans andnations by characteristic hairstyles (so it was a simple matter to distinguisha Seneca, Onondaga or Mohawk warrior at a distance), it is difﬁcult to ﬁndtwo ﬁgures in Hopewell art – and there are quite a few of them – that havethe same hair. Everybody appears to have been free to make a spectacle ofthemselves, or to obtain some dramatic role in the theatre of society, andthis individual expressiveness was reﬂected in miniature depictions ofpeople sporting what seem to be an endless variety of playful, idiosyncraticstyles of haircut, clothing and ornamentation.27 

Yet all this was intricately co-ordinated over large areas. Even locally,each earthwork was one element in a continuous ritual landscape. Theearthworks’ alignments often reference particular segments of the Hopewellcalendar (such as the solstices, phases of the moon and so on), with peoplepresumably having to move back and forth regularly between themonuments to complete a full ceremonial cycle. This is complex: one canonly imagine the kind of detailed knowledge of stars, rivers and seasonsthat would have been required to co-ordinate people from hundreds of milesaway, such that they might congregate on time for rituals in centres thatlasted only for periods of ﬁve or six days at a time, over the course of ayear. Let alone what it would take to actually transform such a systemacross the length and breadth of a continent. 
In later times, Feasts of the Dead were also occasions for the‘resurrection’ of names, as the titles of those who were now gone passed tothe living. It may have been through some such mechanisms that Hopewelldisseminated the basic structure of its clan system across North America.It’s even possible that when the spectacular burials in Hopewell came to anend around AD 400, it was largely because Hopewell’s work was done. Theidiosyncratic nature of its ritual art, for instance, gave way to standardizedversions disseminated across the continent; while great treks to fantastic,temporary capitals that rose miraculously from the mud were no longerrequired to establish ties between groups, who now had a shared idiom forpersonal diplomacy, a common set of rules for interacting with strangers.28 

IN WHICH WE TELL THE STORY OF CAHOKIA, WHICHLOOKS LIKE IT OUGHT TO BE THE FIRST ‘STATE’ IN AMERICA 
One of the many puzzles of Hopewell is how its social arrangements seemto anticipate much later institutions. There was a division between ‘white’and ‘red’ clans: the ﬁrst identiﬁed with summer, circular houses andpeacemaking; the second with winter, square houses and warfare.29 Most later indigenous societies had a separation between peace chiefs and warchiefs: an entirely different administration came into force in times ofmilitary conﬂict, then melted away as soon as matters were resolved. Someof this symbolism appears to originate in Hopewell. Archaeologists evenidentify certain ﬁgures as war chiefs; and yet, despite all this, there is analmost total lack of evidence for actual warfare. One possibility is thatconﬂict took a different, more theatrical form – as in later times, when rivalnations or ‘enemy’ moieties would often play out their hostilities throughaggressive games of lacrosse.30 

In the centuries following the decline of the Hopewell centres, roughlyfrom AD 400 to 800, we start to see a series of familiar developments. First,some groups begin adopting maize as a staple crop and growing it in rivervalleys along the Mississippi ﬂoodplain. Second, actual armed conﬂictbecomes more frequent. In at least some places, this led to populationsliving for longer periods around their local earthworks. Especially in theMississippi valley and on adjacent bluffs, a pattern emerged of small townscentred on earthen pyramids and plazas, some fortiﬁed, often surrounded by extensive stretches of no-man’s-land. A few came to resemble tinykingdoms. Eventually this situation led to a veritable urban explosion withits epicentre at the site of Cahokia, which was soon to become the greatestcity in the Americas north of Mexico.
Cahokia lies in an extensive ﬂoodplain along the Mississippi known asthe American Bottom. It was a bounteous and fertile environment, ideal forgrowing maize, but still a challenging place to build a city since much of itwas swampland, foggy and full of shallow pools. Charles Dickens, whoonce visited this place, described it as ‘an unbroken slough of black mudand water’. In Mississippian cosmology, watery places like this wereconnected to the chaotic underworld – seen as the diametrical opposite of aprecise, predictable celestial order – and it’s no doubt signiﬁcant that someof the ﬁrst large-scale construction at Cahokia centred on a processionalwalkway known as the Rattlesnake Causeway, designed to rise from thesurrounding waters and leading towards the surrounding ridge-top tombs (aPath of Souls, or Way of the Dead). To begin with, then, Cahokia was likelya place of pilgrimage, much like some of the Hopewell sites.31 

Its inhabitants also shared with Hopewell the same love of games.Around AD 600, someone living at Cahokia or close by seems to have comeup with the idea for chunkey, later to become one of the most popular sportsin North America. Chunkey was a complex and highly co-ordinated affairin which running players tried to throw poles as close as possible to arolling wheel or ball without actually touching it.32 It was played at severalearthwork sites that sprang up along the American Bottom: one way ofholding together the increasingly disparate groups of people who came tosettle there. In social terms, it had certain things in common withMesoamerican ball games, though the rules were entirely different. It couldbe either a substitute for, or continuation of, war; it was tied into legend (inthis case, the story of Red Horn the Morning Star who, much like the Mayahero-twins, confronted gods of the underworld); and it could become thefocus of frenetic gambling, when some would even raise themselves or theirfamilies as stakes.33 

In Cahokia and its hinterland we can chart the rise of social hierarchies through the lens of chunkey, as the game became increasingly monopolizedby an exclusive elite. One sign of this is how stone chunkey discs disappearfrom ordinary burials, just as beautifully crafted versions of them start toappear in the richest graves. Chunkey was becoming a spectator sport, and Cahokia the sponsor of a new regional, Mississippian elite. We are not sureexactly how it happened – as an act of religious revelation, perhaps – butaround AD 1050 Cahokia exploded in size, growing from a fairly modestcommunity to a city of over six square miles, including more than 100earthen mounds built around spacious plazas. Its original population of afew thousand was augmented by perhaps 10,000 more, coming fromoutside to settle in Cahokia and its satellite towns, totalling something in theorder of 40,000 in the American Bottom as a whole.34 

The main part of the city was designed and built according to a masterplan in a single burst of activity. Its focus was a huge packed-earth pyramidknown today as Monk’s Mound, standing before an enormous plaza. In asmaller plaza to the west stood a ‘woodhenge’ of cypress posts marking outthe sun’s annual course. Some of Cahokia’s pyramids were topped withpalaces or temples; others with charnel houses or sweat lodges. Acalculated effort was made to resettle foreign populations – or at least theirmost important, inﬂuential representatives – in newly designed thatchhouses, arranged in neighbourhoods around smaller plazas and earthenpyramids; many had their own craft specializations or ethnic identity.35 
From the summit of Monk’s Mound the city’s ruling elite enjoyed powersof surveillance over these planned residential zones.36 At the same time,existing villages and hamlets in Cahokia’s hinterland were disbanded andthe rural population dispersed, scattered in homesteads of one or twofamilies.37 

What’s so striking about this pattern is its suggestion of an almostcomplete dismantling of any self-governing communities outside the city.For those who fell within its orbit, there was nothing much left betweendomestic life – lived under constant surveillance from above – and the awesome spectacle of the city itself.38 That spectacle could be terrifying.Along with games and feasts, in the early decades of Cahokia’s expansionthere were mass executions and burials, carried out in public. As withﬂedgling kingdoms in other parts of the world, these large-scale killingswere directly associated with the funerary rites of nobility; in this case, amortuary facility centred on the paired burials of high-status males andfemales,39 whose shrouded bodies were placed around a surface built upfrom some thousands of shell beads. Around them an earthen mound was formed, precisely oriented to an azimuth derived from the southernmostrising point of the moon. Its contents included four mass graves holding the 
stacked bodies of mainly young women (though one was over ﬁfty), whowere killed speciﬁcally for the occasion.40 

Carefully sifting through the ethnographic and historical evidence,scholars have reconstructed the outlines of what Cahokia – and later kingdoms modelled on it – must have looked like. While somethingendured of the earlier clan organizations, the old moiety system wastransformed into an opposition between nobles and commoners. TheMississippians appear to have been matrilineal, which meant that a mico (ruler) was not succeeded by his children but by his eldest nephew. Noblescould only marry commoners, and after several generations of suchintermarriage the descendants of kings might lose their noble status entirely.So a pool of nobles-turned-commoners always existed from which warriorsand administrators could be drawn. Genealogies were carefully preserved,and there was a priesthood devoted to maintaining the temples, whichcontained images of royal ancestors. Lastly, there was a system of titles forheroic achievement in war, which made it possible for commoners to wintheir way into the nobility, a status symbolized in bird-man imagery, whichalso invoked the prestige of competing at chunkey tournaments.41 

Bird-man symbolism was especially marked in the smaller kingdoms –some ﬁfty in all – that began to appear up and down the Mississippi, ofwhich the largest are at places called Etowah, Moundville and Spiro. Therulers of these towns were often buried with what seem to be preciousbadges and insignia manufactured at Cahokia. Sacred images in Cahokiaitself focused not so much on the hawk and falcon symbolism that appearedeverywhere else as – ﬁttingly for an increasingly prominent centre ofintensive grain production – on the ﬁgure of the Corn Mother, who alsoappears as the Old Woman, a goddess holding a loom. During the eleventhand twelfth centuries, Mississippian sites with links of various kinds toCahokia appear everywhere from Virginia to Minnesota, often in aggressiveconﬂict with their neighbours. Trade routes spanning the continent wereactivated, the materials for new treasures pouring into the American Bottommuch as they once had to Hopewell.42 

Very little of this expansion was directly controlled from the centre. Weare unlikely to be talking about an actual empire so much as an intricateritual alliance, backed up ultimately by force – and things began to growincreasingly violent, fairly fast. Within a century of the initial urbanexplosion at Cahokia, in about AD 1150, a giant palisaded wall was built, though it only included some parts of the city and not others. This markedthe beginning of a long and uneven process of war, destruction anddepopulation. At ﬁrst people seem to have ﬂed the metropolis for thehinterlands, then ultimately abandoned the rural bottomlands entirely.43 
This same process can be observed in many of the smaller Mississippiantowns. Most appear to have begun as co-operative enterprises beforebecoming centralized around the cult of some royal line and receivingpatronage from Cahokia. Then, over the course of a century or two, theyemptied out (in much the same way as the Natchez Great Village was laterto do, and possibly for much the same reasons, as subjects sought freer liveselsewhere) until ﬁnally being sacked, burned or simply deserted.
Whatever happened in Cahokia, it appears to have left extremelyunpleasant memories. Along with much of its bird-man mythology, theplace was erased from any later oral traditions. After AD 1400 the entire fertile expanse of the American Bottom (which at the city’s height hadcontained perhaps as many as 40,000 people), along with the territory fromCahokia up to the Ohio River, became what’s referred to in the literature asthe Vacant or Empty Quarter: a haunted wilderness of overgrown pyramidsand housing blocks crumbling back into swamp, occasionally traversed byhunters but devoid of permanent human settlement.44 

Scholars continue to debate the relative importance of ecological and socialfactors in Cahokia’s collapse, just as they argue about whether or not itshould be considered a ‘complex chiefdom’ or a ‘state’.45 In our own terms (as set out in the last chapter), what we appear to have in Cahokia is asecond-order regime in which two of our three elementary forms ofdomination – in this case, control over violence and charismatic politics –came together in a powerful, even explosive cocktail. This is the samecombination we found in the Classic Maya elite, for whom competitivesports and warfare were similarly fused; and who extended theirsovereignty by bringing large populations into their orbit through organizedspectacle, or by capture, or other forms of compulsion we can only guess at.
Both in Cahokia and the Classic Maya, managerial activities seem tohave focused on the administration of otherworldly matters, notably in thesophistication of their ritual calendars and precise orchestration of sacredspace. These, however, had real-world effects, especially in the areas ofcity-planning, labour mobilization, public surveillance and careful monitoring of the maize cycle.46 Perhaps we are dealing here with attemptsto create ‘third-order’ regimes of domination, albeit of a very different kindto modern nation states, in which control over violence and esotericknowledge became caught up in the spiralling political competition of rivalelites. This may also explain why, in both cases – Cahokia and the Maya –the collapse of such totalizing (totalitarian, even) projects, when ithappened, was itself sudden, comprehensive and total.
Whatever the precise combination of factors at play, by about AD 1350 or 1400 the result was mass defection. Just as the metropolis of Cahokia wasfounded through its rulers’ ability to bring diverse populations together,often from across long distances, in the end the descendants of those peoplesimply walked away. The Vacant Quarter implies a self-conscious rejectionof everything the city of Cahokia stood for.47 How did it happen?
Among descendants of Cahokian subjects, migration is often framed asimplying the restructuring of an entire social order, merging our threeelementary freedoms into a single project of emancipation: to move away,to disobey and to build new social worlds. As we’ll see, the Osage – aSiouan people who appear originally to have inhabited the region of FortAncient in the Middle Ohio River valley before abandoning it for the GreatPlains – used the expression ‘moving to a new country’ as a synonym forconstitutional change.48 It is important to bear in mind that in this part ofNorth America, populations were relatively sparse. There were extensivestretches of uninhabited territory (often marked by ruins and efﬁgies, theirbuilders long since forgotten), so it was not difﬁcult for groups simply torelocate. What we would now call social movements often took the form of quite literal physical movements.
To get a sense of the kind of ideological conﬂicts that must have beengoing on, let’s consider the history of the Etowah river valley, part of aregion then inhabited by ancestors of the Choctaw, in Georgia andTennessee. Around the time of Cahokia’s initial take-off between AD 1000 and 1200, this area was emerging from a period of generalized warfare.Post-conﬂict settlement involved the creation of small towns, each with itstemple-pyramids and plaza, and in every case centred on a large councilhouse, designed as a meeting place for the entire adult community. Gravegoods of the time show no indications of rank. Around 1200 the Etowahvalley was for some reason abandoned; then, around half a century later,people returned to it. A burst of construction ensued, including a palace and charnel house on top of giant mounds – walled off from commoner eyes –and a royal tomb, placed directly atop the ruins of the communal councilhouse. Burials there were accompanied by magniﬁcent bird-man costumesand regalia apparently sent from the workshops of Cahokia itself. Smallervillages were broken up, some of their old residents moved into Etowah,and in the countryside they were replaced by the familiar pattern ofscattered homesteads.49 

Enclosed by a perimeter ditch and substantial palisade wall, the town ofEtowah was at this point clearly the capital of some sort of kingdom. In1375 someone – whether external enemies or internal rebels, we do notknow – sacked Etowah and desecrated its holy places; then, after a brief andabortive attempt at reoccupation, Etowah was again entirely abandoned, aswere all the towns across the region. During this period the priestly ordersseem largely to vanish across much of the Southeast, to be replaced bywarrior micos. Occasionally, these petty rulers would become paramount ina given region, but they lacked either the ritual authority or economicresources to create the kind of urban life that existed before. In about 1500 the Etowah valley fell under the sway of the kingdom of Coosa, by whichtime most of the original population appears to have left and moved on,leaving behind little more than a museum of earthworks for the Coosa tolord it over.50 

Some of those who walked away concentrated around the new capitals.In 1540, a member of Hernando De Soto’s expedition described the mico of Coosa and his core territory (a place now known, oddly enough, as LittleEgypt) in the following terms: 
The cacique came out to welcome him in a carrying chair borne on
the shoulders of his principal men, seated on a cushion, and covered
with a robe of marten skins of the form and size of a woman’s 
shawl. He wore a crown of feathers on his head; and around him
were many Indians playing and singing. The land was very populous
and had many large towns and planted ﬁelds which reached from
one town to the other. It was a charming and fertile land, with good
cultivated ﬁelds stretching along the rivers.51 

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, petty kingdoms of this sortappear to have been the dominant political form in much of the Southeast. 
Their rulers were treated with reverence and received tribute, but their rulewas brittle and unstable. The Coosa mico’s litter, like that of his chief rival,the Lady of Coﬁtachequi, was carried by subordinate lords, largely becausethe latter couldn’t be trusted not to rise up unless kept under constantsurveillance. Shortly after de Soto’s departure several of them did just that,causing the kingdom of Coosa to collapse. Meanwhile, outside the centraltowns much more egalitarian forms of communal life were taking form. 
ON HOW THE COLLAPSE OF THE MISSISSIPPIAN WORLD AND REJECTION OF ITS LEGACY OPENED THE WAY TO NEW FORMS OF INDIGENOUS POLITICS AROUND THE TIME OF THE EUROPEAN INVASION 
By the early eighteenth century these petty kingdoms, and the very practiceof building mounds and pyramids, had almost entirely vanished from theAmerican South and Midwest. At the edge of the prairies, for example,people living in scattered homesteads began migrating seasonally, leavingthe very young and old behind in the earthwork towns and taking toextended hunting and ﬁshing in the surrounding uplands, before ﬁnallyrelocating entirely. In other areas, the towns would be reduced toceremonial centres or Natchez-style hollow courts, where the mico continued to be paid magniﬁcent tokens of respect but held almost no actualpower. Then ﬁnally, when those rulers were deﬁnitively gone, people wouldbegin descending back into the valleys, but this time in communitiesorganized on very different principles: small towns of a few hundredpeople, or at most 1,000 or 2,000, with egalitarian clan structures andcommunal council houses. 
Today historians seem inclined to see these developments as in large parta reaction to the shock of war, slavery, conquest and disease introduced byEuropean settlers. However, they appear to have been the logicalculmination of processes that had been going on for centuries before that.52 

By 1715, the year of the Yamasee War, the dismantling of pettykingdoms was complete across the entire region of former Mississippianinﬂuence, except for isolated hold-overs like the Natchez. Earthworks andhomesteads were both things of the past, and the Southeast came to bedivided among tribal republics, of the sort familiar from earlyethnography.53 A number of factors made this possible. The ﬁrst was demographic. As we’ve noted, North American societies were, with fewexceptions, marked by low birth rates and low population densities, whichin turn facilitated mobility and made it easier for agriculturalists to shiftback to a mode of subsistence more oriented to hunting, ﬁshing andforaging; or simply to relocate entirely. Meanwhile women – who in one ofScott’s ‘grain states’ would typically be viewed by the (male) authorities aslittle more than baby-making machines, and when not pregnant or nursingto be engaged in industrial tasks like spinning and weaving – took onstronger political roles.
Such details form part of the cultural background to a political struggleover the role of hereditary leadership and privileged esoteric knowledge.These battles were still being fought into relatively recent times. Considerthe Nations known in the colonial period as the ‘ﬁve civilized tribes’ of theAmerican Southeast: Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek and Seminole.All of them exemplify this pattern, being governed by communal councilsin which all had equal say and operating by a process of consensus-ﬁnding.Yet at the same time, all shared traces of the older priests, castes andprinces. In some cases hereditary leadership may have persisted into thenineteenth century, straining against the wider preference for moredemocratic forms of government.54 

Some see the egalitarian institutions themselves as an outcome of self-conscious social movements, centred on the summer Green Cornceremonies.55 In art their symbol was the looped square; architecturallythis symbolic template was realized in the creation not just of council ortown houses, but also square grounds for public meetings, a feature with noprecedent in the old Mississippian towns and cities. Among the Cherokeewe ﬁnd evidence of priests claiming to be sent from the heavens withspecial knowledge to impart. Yet we also ﬁnd stories, such as that of theAní-Kutánî, about the existence long ago of a theocratic society governedby a hereditary caste of male priests and how they so systematically abusedtheir power, particularly in their abuse of women, that the people rose upand massacred the lot of them.56 

Much like the arguments Iroquoian speakers presented to Jesuitmissionaries, or for that matter their theories about dreams, descriptions ofdaily life in these post-Mississippian townships often feel strikingly familiar
– perhaps disturbingly so for anyone committed to the idea that the Age ofEnlightenment was the result of a ‘civilizing process’ originating exclusively in Europe. Among the Creek, for instance, the post of mico was reduced to a facilitator of the assembly and supervisor of collectivegranaries. Each day the adult men of a town would gather to spend much ofthe day arguing about politics, in a spirit of rational debate, in conversationspunctuated by the smoking of tobacco and drinking of caffeinatedbeverages.57 Both tobacco and the ‘black drink’ had originally been drugsingested by shamans or other spiritual virtuosos in intense and highlyconcentrated doses so as to produce altered states of consciousness; now,instead, they were doled out in carefully measured portions to everyoneassembled. What Jesuits reported in the Northeast seems to apply here too:‘They believe that there is nothing so suitable as Tobacco to appease thepassions; that is why they never attend a council without a pipe or calumetin their mouths. The smoke, they say, gives them intelligence, and enablesthem to see clearly through the most intricate matters.’58 

Now, if all this sounds suspiciously reminiscent of an Enlightenmentcoffee-house it isn’t a total coincidence. Tobacco, for example, was adoptedaround this period by settlers then taken back and popularized in Europeitself, and it was indeed promoted in Europe as a drug to be taken in smalldoses to focus the mind. Obviously, there is no direct cultural translationhere. There never is. But as we have seen, indigenous North American ideas
– from the advocacy of individual liberties to scepticism of revealedreligion – certainly had an impact on the European Enlightenment, eventhough, like pipe-smoking, such ideas underwent many transformations inthe process.59 No doubt it would be too much to suggest that theEnlightenment itself had its ﬁrst stirrings in seventeenth-century NorthAmerica. But it’s possible, perhaps, to imagine some future non-Eurocentrichistory where such a suggestion would not be treated as almost bydeﬁnition outrageous and absurd. 
HOW THE OSAGE CAME TO EMBODY THE PRINCIPLE OF SELF-CONSTITUTION, LATER TO BE CELEBRATED INMONTESQUIEU’S
THE SPIRIT OF THE LAWS 
Clearly, evolutionist categories only confuse the issue here. Arguing aboutwhether Hopewellians were ‘bands’, ‘tribes’ or ‘chiefdoms’, or indeedwhether Cahokia was a ‘complex chiefdom’ or a ‘state’, tells us virtually nothing. Insofar as we can speak of ‘states’ and ‘chiefdoms’ at all, in thecase of Native North America the state-making project seems to come ﬁrst,virtually out of nowhere, and the chiefdoms observed by de Soto and hissuccessors appear to be little more than the rubble left behind by itsdownfall. 
There must be more interesting and useful questions to ask of the past,and the categories we’ve been developing in this book suggest what someof these might be. As we’ve seen, an important feature in much of theAmericas is the relationship between esoteric and bureaucratic knowledge.On the surface, the two might not have much to do with one another. It iseasy enough to see how brute force can take institutional form insovereignty, or as the assertion of charisma in a competitive political ﬁeld.The path from knowledge, as a general form of domination, toadministrative power might seem more circuitous. Does the kind of esotericknowledge we encounter at Chavín, often founded in hallucinogenicexperience, really have anything in common with the accounting methodsof the later Inca? It seems highly unlikely – until, that is, we recall that evenin much more recent times, qualiﬁcations to enter bureaucracies aretypically based on some form of knowledge that has virtually nothing to dowith actual administration. It’s only important because it’s obscure. Hencein tenth-century China or eighteenth-century Germany, aspiring civilservants had to pass exams on proﬁciency in literary classics, written inarchaic or even dead languages, just as today they will have had to passexams on rational choice theory or the philosophy of Jacques Derrida. Thearts of administration are really only learned later on and through moretraditional means: by practice, apprenticeship or informal mentoring.
Similarly, those who designed the great construction projects of PovertyPoint or Hopewell were clearly drawing on esoteric knowledge of some sort
– astronomical, mythic, numerological – which was contiguous with thepractical knowledge of maths, engineering and construction, not to mentiontechniques of organizing and monitoring human labour (even voluntarylabour) which were required to realize those designs. Over the long term ofpre-Columbian history, this particular sort of knowledge always seems to lieat the core of systems of domination that periodically emerged. Hopewell isa perfect example, since the heroic games that accompanied ceremonialprojects were not really the basis for systematic domination at all.60 
Cahokia, on the other hand, appears to represent a self-conscious effort to turn that style of administrative esoterica into a basis for sovereignty; thegradual transformation of geometric earthworks, designed on cosmicprinciples, into actual fortiﬁcations being only the most obvious indication.In the end it didn’t work. Political power retreated back into heroic theatre,if in a decidedly more violent form.
Even more strikingly, however, the very principle of esoteric knowledgecame increasingly to be challenged. 
What we saw in Hopewell was a kind of ‘reformation’, in the same sensethat the European Reformation of the sixteenth century involved afundamental reorientation of access to the sacred – albeit one which had knock-on effects in just about every other aspect of social life, from theorganization of work to the nature of politics. In Europe these battles playedout over the medium of scripture: the translation of the Bible from obscureancient languages into regional vernaculars, and its release from the closedsanctuary of the High Faith into mass dissemination via the printing press.In the pre-Columbian Americas, the equivalent media revolution focusedinstead on the (quite literal) reformation of mathematical principlesunderlying the creation of complex geometrical earthworks which capturedthe sacred in spatial form.
In both cases, such reformations determined who could and could notpartake of a sacred power encapsulated in stories and myths, encoded on theone hand as complex layers of scripture (the Old and New Testaments andother holy books), and on the other as a network of landscape monuments,just as complex in their own way. Indeed, there is every reason to think thatthe images of chthonic and other beings frozen in ancient earthworks weretestaments of a sort. They were mnemonic schemes that prompted therecollection and re-enactment of exploits carried out by founding ancestorsat the beginning of days and magniﬁed in monumental form, to bewitnessed by the powers dwelling ‘on high’. While European clergy burnedincense to form a sentient bond with the invisible (a distant echo of biblicalanimal sacriﬁce), Hopewell peoples lit tobacco in their efﬁgy pipes, sendingsmoke up towards the heavens.
Here we begin to comprehend what it might have meant actually to stopcreating such monuments entirely, or to repurpose drugs like tobaccotowards collective, rational debate. Of course, this does not necessarilyimply a systematic, Enlightenment-style rejection of esoteric knowledge. It could also mean the democratization of such knowledge – or at least thetransformation of what had once been a theocratic elite into a kind of oligarchy. We ﬁnd an excellent example of this in the history of the Osage.
A nation of the Great Plains, the Osage are directly descended fromMississippianized Fort Ancient people, and much of their ritual andmythology can be traced back directly to their Midwestern origins.61 The Osage were doubly fortunate. First, because they succeeded in takingadvantage of a strategic position on the Missouri River to ally with theFrench government and thereby maintain their independence, even creatingsomething of a trading empire from 1678 to 1803. Second, because theethnographer who documented their ancient traditions in the ﬁrst decades ofthe twentieth century, Francis La Flesche, was himself a native speaker ofOmaha (a closely related language), and therefore appears to have beenunusually capable and receptive. As a result we have a much better sense ofhow Osage elders thought about their own traditions than is the case formost other Plains societies. 
Let us begin with a map of a typical Osage summer village. Osagecommunities typically moved between three seasonal locations: permanentvillages of multi-family lodge houses made up of perhaps 2,000 people;summer camps; and camps for the annual midwinter bison hunts. The basicvillage pattern was a circle divided into two exogamous moieties, sky andearth, with twenty-four clans in all, each of which had to be represented inany settlement or camp, just as at least one representative of each had to bepresent for any major ritual. The system was initially based on a tripartitedivision: seven clans each designated Sky People, Earth People and WaterPeople, with the last two grouped together as the earth moiety in relation tosky, making twenty-one; then over time this was expanded when clans wereadded to become 7+2 (sky, Tsizhu) against 7+7+1 (earth, Honga), givingtwenty-four in total.
At this point you may well be wondering how, precisely, did it ever comeabout that people arranged themselves in such intricate patterns? Whoexactly decided that each of the twenty-four clans would be represented inevery village, and how did they orchestrate things so it would happen? Inthe case of the Osage we actually have something of an answer, since Osagehistory was remembered essentially as a series of constitutional crises inwhich the elders of the community gradually worked out exactly thisarrangement. 

The history, according to La Flesche, is difﬁcult to piece together becauseit is distributed among the clans. Or, to be more exact, a bare-bones versionof the story, full of cryptic allusions, is known to everyone; but each clanalso has its own history and stock of secret knowledge, whereby the truemeaning of certain aspects of the story is revealed over the course of sevenlevels of initiation. The real story then can be said to be broken into 168pieces – arguably 336, since each revelation contained two parts: a politicalhistory and an accompanying philosophical reﬂection on what that historyreveals about the forces responsible for dynamic aspects of the visibleworld that caused the stars to move, plants to grow, and so forth. 
Records, La Flesche observed, had also been kept of particulardiscussions in which various results of this study of nature were debatedand discussed. Osage concluded that this force was ultimately unknowableand gave it the name Wakonda, which could alternately be translated as‘God’ or ‘Mystery’.62 Through lengthy investigation, La Flesche notes,elders determined that life and motion was produced by the interaction oftwo principles – sky and earth – and therefore they divided their ownsociety in the same way, arranging it so that men from one division couldonly take wives from the other. A village was a model of the universe, andas such a form of ‘supplication’ to its animating power.63 

Initiation through the levels of understanding required a substantialinvestment of time and wealth, and most Osage only attained the ﬁrst orsecond tier. Those who reached the top were known collectively as theNohozhinga or ‘Little Old Men’ (though some were women),64 and were also the ultimate political authorities. While every Osage was expected tospend an hour after sunrise in prayerful reﬂection, the Little-Old-Mencarried out daily deliberations on questions of natural philosophy and theirspeciﬁc relevance to political issues of the day. They also kept a history ofthe most important discussions.65 La Flesche explains that, periodically,particularly perplexing questions would come up: either about the nature ofthe visible universe, or about the application of these understandings tohuman affairs. At this point it was customary for two elders to retreat to asecluded spot in the wilderness and carry out a vigil for four to seven days,to ‘search their minds’, before returning with a report on their conclusions.
The Nohozhinga were the body that met daily to discuss affairs of state.66 While larger assemblies could be called to ratify decisions, theywere the effective government. In this sense one could say that the Osagewere a theocracy, though it would be more accurate, perhaps, to say therewas no difference between ofﬁcials, priests and philosophers. All were title-bearing ofﬁcials, including the ‘soldiers’ assigned to help chiefs enforcetheir decisions, while ‘Protectors of the Land’ assigned to hunt down andkill outsiders who poached game were also religious ﬁgures. As for thehistory: it begins in mythic terms, as an ‘allegorical fable’, then rapidlyturns into a story about institutional reform.
In the beginning, the three main divisions – Sky People, Earth People andWater People – descended into the world and set out in search of itsindigenous inhabitants. When they located these inhabitants, they were discovered to be in a repulsive state: living amid ﬁlth, bones and carrion,feeding on offal, rotting ﬂesh, even each other. Despite this more-than-Hobbesian situation, the Isolated Earth People (as they came to be known)were also powerful sorcerers, capable of using the four winds to destroy lifeeverywhere. Only the chief of the Water division had the courage to entertheir village, negotiate with their leader and convince his people to abandontheir murderous and unsanitary ways. In the end, he persuaded the IsolatedEarth People to join them in a federation – to ‘move to a new country’, freefrom the pollution of decaying corpses. This is how the circular village planwas ﬁrst conceived, with the one-time wizards placed opposite Water, at theeastern door, where they were in charge of the House of Mystery, used forall peaceful rituals, and where all children were brought to be named. TheBear clan of the Earth division was put in charge of an opposite House ofMystery, responsible for rituals concerning war. The problem was that theIsolated Earth People, while no longer murderous, did not proveparticularly effective allies either. Before long everything had descendedinto continual strife and feuding, until the Water division demanded another‘move to a new country’, which initiated, among other things, an elaborateprocess of constitutional reform, making declarations of war impossiblewithout the acquiescence of every clan. This too proved problematic overtime, since it meant that if an external enemy entered the country, at least aweek was required to organize a military response. Eventually it becamenecessary yet again to ‘move to another country’, which this time involvedthe creation of a new, decentralized clan-by-clan system of militaryauthority. This in turn led to a new crisis and round of reforms: in this case,the separation of civil and military affairs with the creation of a hereditarypeace chief for each division, their houses placed on the east and westextremes of the village, and various subordinate ofﬁcials, as well as aparallel structure with responsibility for all ﬁve major Osage villages.
We will not linger over the details. But two elements of the story deserveemphasis. The ﬁrst is that the narrative sets off from the neutralization ofarbitrary power: the taming of the Isolated Earth People’s leader – the chiefsorcerer, who abuses his deadly knowledge – by according him somecentral position in a new system of alliances. This is a common storyamong the descendants of groups that had formerly come under theinﬂuence of Mississippian civilization. In the process of co-opting theirleader, the destructive ritual knowledge once held by the Isolated Earth People was, eventually, distributed to everyone, along with elaborate checksand balances concerning its use. The second is that even the Osage, whoascribed key roles to sacred knowledge in their political affairs, in no sensesaw their social structure as something given from on high but rather as aseries of legal and intellectual discoveries – even breakthroughs.
This last point is critical, because – as outlined earlier – we are used toimagining that the very notion of a people self-consciously creating theirown institutional arrangements is largely a product of the Enlightenment.Obviously, the idea that nations could be effectively created by greatlawmakers such as Solon of Athens, Lycurgus in Sparta or Zoroaster inPersia, and that their national character was in some sense a product of thatinstitutional structure, was a familiar one in antiquity. But we are generallytaught to think of the French political philosopher Charles-Louis deSecondat, Baron de Montesquieu as the ﬁrst to build an explicit andsystematic body of theory based on the principle of institutional reform withhis book The Spirit of the Laws (1748). By doing so, it’s widely believed, heeffectively created modern politics. The Founding Fathers of the UnitedStates, all avid readers of Montesquieu, were consciously trying to put histheories into practice when they attempted to create a constitution thatwould preserve the spirit of individual liberty, and spoke of the results as a‘government of laws and not of men’.
As it turns out, precisely this sort of thinking was commonplace in NorthAmerica well before European settlers appeared on the scene. It might notbe a coincidence, in fact, that in 1725 a French explorer named Bourgmontbrought an Osage and Missouria delegation across the Atlantic to Paris,around the time Lahontan’s works were at the height of their popularity. Itwas traditional at the time to organize a series of public events around such‘savage’ diplomats and arrange private meetings with prominent Europeanintellectuals. We don’t know whom speciﬁcally they met with, butMontesquieu was indeed in Paris at the time, and already working on suchsubjects. As one historian of the Osage notes, it is hard to imagineMontesquieu would not have attended. At any rate, the chapters in The Spirit of the Laws which speculate on the modes of savage governmentseem an almost exact reproduction of what Montesquieu would likely haveheard from them, albeit framed by an artiﬁcial distinction between thosewho do or don’t cultivate the land.67 

The connections may well run deeper than we think. 
IN WHICH WE RETURN TO IROQUOIA, AND CONSIDER THEPOLITICAL PHILOSOPHIES LIKELY TO HAVE BEEN FAMILIAR TO KANDIARONK IN HIS YOUTH 
We have come full circle. The case of North America not only throwsconventional evolutionary schemes into chaos; it also clearly demonstratesthat it’s simply not true to say that if one falls into the trap of ‘stateformation’ there’s no getting out. Whatever happened in Cahokia, thebacklash against it was so severe that it set forth repercussions we are stillfeeling today.
What we are suggesting is that indigenous doctrines of individual liberty,mutual aid and political equality, which made such an impression on FrenchEnlightenment thinkers, were neither (as many of them supposed) the wayall humans can be expected to behave in a State of Nature. Nor were they(as many anthropologists now assume) simply the way the cultural cookiehappened to crumble in that particular part of the world. This is not to saythere is no truth whatsoever in either of these positions. As we’ve saidbefore, there are certain freedoms – to move, to disobey, to rearrange socialties – that tend to be taken for granted by anyone who has not beenspeciﬁcally trained into obedience (as anyone reading this book, forinstance, is likely to have been). Still, the societies that European settlersencountered, and the ideals expressed by thinkers like Kandiaronk, onlyreally make sense as the product of a speciﬁc political history: a history inwhich questions of hereditary power, revealed religion, personal freedomand the independence of women were still very much matters of self-conscious debate, and in which the overall direction, for the last threecenturies at least, had been explicitly anti-authoritarian.
East St Louis is, of course, a long way from Montreal, and no one to ourknowledge has ever suggested that Iroquoian-speaking peoples of the GreatLakes region were ever, themselves, directly under Mississippian rule. So itwould be going a bit too far to suggest that the views recorded by men likeLahontan were, in any literal sense, the ideology that overthrewMississippian civilization. Still, a careful review of oral traditions, historicalaccounts and the ethnographic record shows that those who framed what wecall the ‘indigenous critique’ of European civilization were not only keenlyaware of alternative political possibilities, but for the most part saw theirown social orders as self-conscious creations, designed as a barrier against all that Cahokia might have represented – or indeed, all those qualities theywere later to ﬁnd so objectionable in the French. 
Let us start with the available oral traditions. These are unfortunatelysomewhat limited. During the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries,Iroquoia was divided between a number of shifting political coalitions andconfederacies of which the most prominent were the Wendat (Huron), basedin what’s now Quebec; the Five Nations or Haudenosaunee (often referredto as ‘League Iroquois’), distributed across what’s now upstate New York;and an Ontario-based confederation that the French referred to as the ‘Neutrals’. The Wendat referred to this last as Attiwandaronk – which literally means ‘those whose speech is not quite right’. We don’t actuallyknow what these Neutrals called themselves (clearly it wasn’t that); butaccording to early accounts, they were by far the most numerous andpowerful, at least until their society was devastated by famine and diseasein the 1630s and 1640s. Afterwards the survivors were absorbed by theSeneca, given names and thus incorporated in one or other Seneca clan.
A similar fate befell the Wendat Confederation, whose power had beendecisively broken in the year Kandiaronk was born, 1649, when they werescattered or absorbed during the notorious ‘Beaver Wars’. In Kandiaronk’sown lifetime the remaining Wendat were leading a fairly precariousexistence: partly driven north towards Quebec; partly under the protectionof a French fort in a place called Michilimackinac, near Lake Michigan.Kandiaronk himself spent much of his life trying to put the confederation’spieces back together and, according to oral histories at least, attempting tofound a coalition that would unite the warring nations against the invaders.In this he failed. As a result, we don’t actually know the stories told bymembers of any of these other great confederacies about the origins of theirpolitical institutions. By the time oral histories began to be written down inthe nineteenth century, only the Haudenosaunee remained.
We do, however, have numerous versions of the foundation of the Leagueof Five Nations (the Seneca, Oneida, Onondaga, Cayuga and Mohawk), anepic known as the Gayanashagowa. What is most remarkable about this epic, in the present context at least, is the degree to which it representspolitical institutions as self-conscious human creations. Certainly, the storycontains magical elements. In a certain sense, the main characters –Deganawideh the Peacemaker, Jigonsaseh the Mother of Nations and so forth – are reincarnations of characters from the creation myth. But whatcomes through most strongly in the text is its representation of a socialproblem with a social solution: a breakdown of relationships in which thecountry is plunged into chaos and revenge, spiralling to a point where socialorder has dissolved away and where the powerful have become literalcannibals. Most powerful of all is Adodarhoh (Tadodaho), who isrepresented as a witch, deformed, monstrous and capable of commandingothers to do his bidding.
The narrative centres on a hero, Deganawideh the Peacemaker, whoappears from what is later to be the Attiwandaronk (Neutral) territory to thenorthwest, determined to put an end to this chaotic state of affairs. He winsto his cause ﬁrst the Jigonsaseh, a woman famous for standing outside allquarrels (he ﬁnds her hosting and feeding war parties from all sides of theconﬂict); and then Hiawatha, one of Adodarhoh’s cannibal henchmen.Together they set about winning over the people of each nation to agree oncreating a formal structure for heading off disputes and creating peace.Hence the system of titles, nested councils, consensus-ﬁnding, condolencerituals and the prominent role of female elders in formulating policy. In thestory, the very last to be won over is Adodarhoh himself, who is graduallyhealed of his deformities and turned into a human being. In the end the lawsof the League are ‘spoken into’ belts of wampum, which serves as itsconstitution; the records are transferred to the keeping of Adodarhoh; and,his work ﬁnished, the Peacemaker vanishes from the earth.
Since Haudenosaunee names are passed on like titles, there has continuedto be an Adodarhoh, just as there is also still a Jigonsaseh and Hiawatha, tothis day. Forty-nine sachems, delegated to convey the decisions of theirnation’s councils, continue to meet regularly. These meetings always beginwith a rite of ‘condolence’, in which they wipe away the grief and ragecaused by the memory of anyone who died in the interim, to clear theirminds to go about the business of establishing peace (the ﬁftieth, thePeacemaker himself, is always represented by an empty place). This federalsystem was the peak of a complex apparatus of subordinate councils, maleand female, all with carefully designated powers – but none with actualpowers of compulsion.
In its essence, the story is not so different from the founding of the Osagesocial order: a terrifying witch is brought back into society, and in theprocess transformed into a peacemaker. The main difference is that, in this case, Adodarhoh is quite explicitly a ruler, one invested with power ofcommand: 
South of the Onondaga town lived an evil-minded man. His lodgewas in a swale and his nest was made of bulrushes. His body wasdistorted by seven crooks and his long tangled locks were adornedby withering living serpents. Moreover, this monster was a devourerof raw meat, even of human ﬂesh. He was also a master of wizardryand by his magic he destroyed men but he could not be destroyed.Adodarhoh was the name of the evil man. 
Notwithstanding the evil character of Adodarhoh the people ofOnondaga, the Nation of Many Hills, obeyed his commands andthough it cost many lives they satisﬁed his insane whims, so muchdid they fear him and his sorcery.68 

It is an anthropological commonplace that if you want to get a sense of asociety’s ultimate values it is best to look at what they consider to be theworst sort of behaviour; and that the best way to get a sense of what theyconsider to be the worst possible behaviour is by examining ideas aboutwitches. For the Haudenosaunee, the giving of orders is represented asbeing almost as serious an outrage as the eating of human ﬂesh.69 

Representing Adodarhoh as a king might seem surprising, since thereseems no reason to think that, before the arrival of Europeans, either theFive Nations or any of their immediate neighbours had any immediateexperience of arbitrary command. This raises precisely the question oftendirected against arguments70 that indigenous institutions of chiefship werein fact designed to prevent any danger of states emerging: how could somany societies be organizing their entire political system around headingoff something (i.e. ‘the state’) that they had never experienced? Thestraightforward response is that most of the narratives were gathered in thenineteenth century, by which time any indigenous American was likely tohave had long and bitter experience of the United States government: menin uniforms carrying legal briefs, issuing arbitrary commands and muchmore besides. So perhaps this element was added to these narratives later?
Anything is possible, of course, but this strikes us as unlikely.71 
Even in more recent times, the danger of being accused of witchcraft wasdeployed against ofﬁce holders to ensure that none could accumulate any 
appreciable advantage over their fellows – particularly in wealth. Here wehave to return to the Iroquoian theory about dreams as repressed desires,mentioned earlier in the chapter. One interesting twist of this theory is thatit was considered the responsibility of others to realize a fellow communitymember’s dream: even if one dreamed of appropriating a neighbour’spossession, it could only be refused at the risk of endangering their health.To do so was considered beyond awkward; almost socially impossible.Even if one did it would cause outraged gossip, and very possibly bloodyrevenge: if somebody was thought to have died because somebody elserefused to grant a soul wish, his or her relatives might retaliate physically,or by supernatural means.72 

Any member of an Iroquoian society given an order would have ﬁercelyresisted it as a threat to their personal autonomy – but the one exception tothis norm was, precisely, dreams.73 One Huron-Wendat chief gave awayhis prized European cat, which he had carried by canoe all the way fromQuebec, to a woman who dreamed she could only be cured by owning it(Iroquoians also feared becoming the victims of witchcraft practisedconsciously or unconsciously by people who envied them). Dreams weretreated as if they were commands, delivered either by one’s own soul orpossibly, in the case of a particularly vivid or portentous dream, by somegreater spirit. The spirit might be the Creator or some other spirit, perhapsentirely unknown. Dreamers could become prophets – if only, usually, for arelatively brief period of time.74 During that time, however, their ordershad to be obeyed. (Needless to say, there were few more terrible crimesthan to falsify a dream.)
In other words, the image of the witch was at the centre of a complex ofideas that had everything to do with unconscious desire, including theunconscious desire to dominate, and the need both to realize it and to keepit under control. 
How did all this come about, historically?
The exact time and circumstance of the League of Five Nations’ creationis unclear; dates have been proposed ranging from AD 1142 to sometime around 1650.75 No doubt the creation of such confederacies was an ongoing process; and surely, like almost all historical epics, theGayanashagowa patches together elements, many historically accurate,others less so, drawn from different periods of time. What we know from the archaeological record is that Iroquoian society as it existed in theseventeenth century began to take form around the same time as the heydayof Cahokia. 
By around AD 1100 maize was being cultivated in Ontario, in what laterbecame Attiwandaronk (Neutral) territory. Over the next several centuries,the ‘three sisters’ (corn, beans and squash) became ever more important inlocal diets – though Iroquoians were careful to balance the new crops witholder traditions of hunting, ﬁshing and foraging. The key period seems to bewhat’s called the Late Owasco phase, from AD 1230 to 1375, when peoplebegan to move away from their previous settlements (and from their earlierpatterns of seasonal mobility) along waterways, settling in palisaded townsoccupied all year around in which longhouses, presumably based inmatrilineal clans, became the predominant form of dwelling. Many of thesetowns were quite substantial, containing as many as 2,000 inhabitants (thatis, something approaching a quarter of the population of central Cahokia).76 

References to cannibalism in the Gayanashagowa epic are not purefantasy: endemic warfare and the torture and ceremonial sacriﬁce of warprisoners are sporadically documented from AD 1050. Some contemporaryHaudenosaunee scholars think the myth refers to an actual conﬂict betweenpolitical ideologies within Iroquoian societies at the time; turning especiallyon the importance of women, and agriculture, against defenders of an oldermale-dominated order where prestige was entirely based in war andhunting.77 (If so, it would not look so very different from the kind ofideological divergence we’ve suggested might have been taking place in theMiddle East during the early phases of the Neolithic.)78 Some kind of compromise between these two positions appears to have been reachedaround the eleventh century AD, one result of which was a stabilizing ofpopulation at a modest level. Population numbers increased fairly quicklyfor two or three centuries after the widespread adoption of maize, squashand beans, but by the ﬁfteenth century they had levelled off. The Jesuitslater reported how Iroquoian women were careful to space their births,setting optimal population to the ﬁsh and game capacities of the region, notits potential agricultural productivity. In this way the cultural emphasis onmale hunting actually reinforced the power and autonomy of Iroquoianwomen, who maintained their own councils and ofﬁcials and whose powerin local affairs at least was clearly greater than that of their men.79 

In the period spanning the twelfth to fourteenth centuries, neither theWendat Confederacy nor Haudenosaunee show much evidence of havingextensive contact or even much trade with the Mississippians, whose mainpresence in the Northeast was in the Fort Ancient region along the OhioRiver and the nearby Monongahela valley. This is not true, however, of theAttiwandaronk. By AD 1300, much of the Ontario area was indeed underMississippian inﬂuence. It is doubtful, but not totally inconceivable, thatthere were migrations from the Cahokian heartland.80 Even if there weren’t, the Attiwandaronk appear to have been monopolizing trade to thesouth and through it to the Chesapeake Bay and beyond, leaving the Wendatand Haudenosaunee to form relations with Algonkian peoples to their northand east. The sixteenth century saw a sharp increase in Mississippianinﬂuences in Ontario, including various cult objects and ceremonial regalia,and even large numbers of chunkey stones of the same style that also appearat Fort Ancient. 
Archaeologists refer to all this as ‘Mississippianization’, and it isaccompanied by strong evidence for a renewed burst of trade at least as faras Delaware culminating in, among other things, the arrival of enormousquantities of shells and shell beads derived from the mid-Atlantic seaboardfrom around 1610 onwards, to be piled up in Attiwandaronk tombs. By thattime, the Attiwandaronk population was several times larger than any of theneighbouring confederations, Wendat, Haudenosaunee, let alone the Erie,Petun, Wenro or other small rivals; and its capital, Ounotisaston, was thenamong the largest settlements in the Northeast. (Scholars, predictably, argueabout whether the Neutrals could thus qualify as a ‘simple chiefdom’ ratherthan a mere ‘tribe’.)
Certainly, the Jesuits who visited the region before Attiwandaronksociety was, effectively, destroyed by plagues and famines were unanimousin insisting that its constitution was fundamentally different from that of itsneighbours. We will probably never have the means to reconstruct preciselyhow. For instance, the French referred to the Attiwandaronk as ‘the NeutralNation’ largely because they took no part in the near-constant conﬂictsbetween the various nations making up the Wendat and Haudenosaunee, butinstead allowed war parties from both sides free passage through theirterritories. This echoes the behaviour attributed to the Jigonsaseh, Motherof Nations, the highest-ranking woman ofﬁcial among the laterHaudenosaunee, in their national epic, who was indeed said to have been of Attiwandaronk origin. But at the same time the Attiwandaronk were in nosense neutral in their relations with many of their western and southernneighbours.
Indeed, according to the Recollect Father Joseph de la Roche Daillon, in1627 the Attiwandaronk were dominated by a warlord named Tsouharissen,‘the chief of the greatest credit and authority that has ever been in all thesenations, because he is not only chief of his town, but of all those of hisnation … It is unexampled in the other nations to have a chief so absolute.He acquired this honour and power by his courage, and by having beenmany times at war against seventeen nations who are their enemies.’81 
When he was away at war, in fact, the federal council (in all other Iroquoiansocieties the ultimate authority) could make no important decisions.Tsouharissen seems to have been something at least very like a king.
What was the relation of Tsouharissen and the Jigonsaseh, a ﬁgure whocame to exemplify principles of reconciliation that are in many waysprecisely the opposite of kingship and self-aggrandizement? We don’tknow. The only source we have for details of Tsouharissen’s life is verymuch contested, an oral history purporting to be the testimony ofTsouharissen’s third wife, passed down three centuries to the present day.82 
Almost all historians discount it – but that isn’t necessarily an absolutedisqualiﬁcation. At any rate, according to the account Tsouharissen was achild prodigy, a brilliant student of esoteric knowledge. The story of hisexistence reached a certain Cherokee priest, who travelled to become histutor; he found a great crystal which he said marked him as a reincarnationof the Sun and fought many wars and married four times. But when hedecided to hand on his mantle to the daughter of his youngest Tuscarorawife, a similar child prodigy, disaster struck. So infuriated by this plan washis senior (Attiwandaronk) wife, of the highest-ranking Turtle clan, that sheambushed and killed the daughter, whose mother took her own life indespair. Tsouharissen, in a rage, massacred the culprit’s entire lineage,including his own heirs, thus effectively destroying any possibility ofdynastic succession.
As we say, we have no idea how much credit to give the story: but we doknow that its broad outlines reﬂect realities. Attiwandaronk at that time did indeed have regular connections with nations as far away as the Cherokee;while the problems of how to square esoteric knowledge with democraticinstitutions, or even the difﬁculties faced by powerful men trying to establish dynasties when descent was organized according to matrilinealclans with no internal ranking, would have been familiar issues in NorthAmerica at that time. Tsouharissen deﬁnitely existed, and he did apparentlytry to translate his success as a warrior into centralized power. We alsoknow it ultimately came to nothing. We just don’t know if it really came tonothing in this particular way. 
By the time Baron de Lahontan was serving with the French army inCanada, and Kandiaronk was holding forth on questions of political theoryat his periodic dinners with Governor Frontenac, the Attiwandaronk nolonger existed. Still, the events surrounding Tsouharissen’s life were likelyto have been familiar to Kandiaronk, as they would have been vividchildhood memories for many of the elders known to him in his formativeyears. The Jigonsaseh, Mother of Nations, for instance, was still very muchalive, the last Attiwandaronk holder of the title having been incorporated inthe Wolf clan of the Seneca in 1650. She remained established in her traditional seat, a fortress called Kienuka overlooking the Niagara gorge.83 
Either that Jigonsaseh – or, more likely, her successor – was still there in1687, when Louis XIV decided to put an end to the ongoing threat the FiveNations posed to French settlement by sending a seasoned militarycommander, the Marquis de Denonville, as governor, with orders to usewhatever force necessary to drive the Nations from what is now upstateNew York. 
We have a report on what happened from Lahontan’s own memoirs.Feigning interest in a peace settlement, Denonville invited the Leaguecouncil, as a body, to negotiate terms in a place called Fort Frontenac (afterthe former governor). Some 200 delegates arrived, including all thepermanent ofﬁcers of the confederation and many from the women’scouncils as well. Summarily arresting them, Denonville shipped them off toFrance to serve as galley slaves. Then, taking advantage of the resultingconfusion, he ordered his men to invade the Five Nations’ territory.(Lahontan, who strongly disapproved of the proceedings, got himself intotrouble for trying to intervene and stop some underlings from casuallytorturing the prisoners – he was ordered away, but in the end spared furthersanction after protesting that he had been drunk. Some years later, in adifferent context, an order was put out for his arrest on grounds ofinsubordination, and he had to ﬂee to Amsterdam.)84 

The Jigonsaseh, however, had chosen not to attend Denonville’s meeting.The arrest of the entire Grand Council left her the highest-ranking Leagueofﬁcial. Since in such an emergency there was no time to raise new chiefs,she and the remaining clan mothers themselves raised an army. Many ofthose recruited, it is reported, were themselves Seneca women. As it turnedout, the Jigonsaseh was a far superior military tactician to Denonville. Afterrouting the invading French troops near Victor, New York, her forces wereat the point of entering Montreal when the French government sued forpeace, agreeing to dismantle Fort Niagara and return the surviving galleyslaves.85 When Lahontan later notes that, like Kandiaronk, ‘those who hadbeen galley slaves in France’ were highly critical of French institutions, heis referring largely to those taken prisoner on this occasion – or morespeciﬁcally the dozen or so, out of the original 200, who made it back alive.
In such a lethal context, why draw attention to the depredations of a self-appointed lord such as Tsouharissen? What his example demonstrates, wesuggest, is that even within indigenous society, the political question wasnever deﬁnitively settled. Certainly, the overall direction, in the wake ofCahokia, was a broad movement away from overlords of any sort andtowards constitutional structures carefully worked out to distribute power insuch a way that they would never return. But the possibility that they mightalways lurked in the background. Other paradigms of governance existed,and ambitious men – or women – could, if occasion allowed, appeal tothem. After her defeat of Denonville the Jigonsaseh appears to havedemobilized her army and returned to the process of selecting new ofﬁcialsto reconstitute the Great Council. If she had chosen to act otherwise,however, precedents were available.
It was precisely this combination of such conﬂicting ideologicalpossibilities – and, of course, the Iroquoian penchant for prolonged politicalargument – that lay behind what we have called the indigenous critique ofEuropean society. It would be impossible to understand the origins of itsparticular emphasis on individual liberty, for instance, outside that context.Those ideas about liberty had a profound impact on the world. In otherwords, not only did indigenous North Americans manage almost entirely tosidestep the evolutionary trap that we assume must always lead, eventually,from agriculture to the rise of some all-powerful state or empire; but indoing so they developed political sensibilities that were ultimately to have a deep inﬂuence on Enlightenment thinkers and, through them, are still withus today.
In this sense, at least, the Wendat won the argument. It would beimpossible for a European today, or anyone, really – whatever they actuallythought – to take a position like that of the seventeenth-century Jesuits andsimply declare themselves opposed to the very principle of human freedom. 

12 

Conclusion 
The dawn of everything 
This book began with an appeal to ask better questions. We started out byobserving that to inquire after the origins of inequality necessarily meanscreating a myth, a fall from grace, a technological transposition of the ﬁrstchapters of the Book of Genesis – which, in most contemporary versions,takes the form of a mythical narrative stripped of any prospect ofredemption. In these accounts, the best we humans can hope for is somemodest tinkering with our inherently squalid condition – and hopefully,dramatic action to prevent any looming, absolute disaster. The only othertheory on offer to date has been to assume that there were no origins ofinequality, because humans are naturally somewhat thuggish creatures andour beginnings were a miserable, violent affair; in which case ‘progress’ or‘civilization’ – driven forward, largely, by our own selﬁsh and competitivenature – was itself redemptive. This view is extremely popular amongbillionaires but holds little appeal to anyone else, including scientists, whoare keenly aware that it isn’t in accord with the facts.
It’s hardly surprising, perhaps, that most people feel a spontaneousafﬁnity with the tragic version of the story, and not just because of itsscriptural roots. The more rosy, optimistic narrative – whereby the progressof Western civilization inevitably makes everyone happier, wealthier andmore secure – has at least one obvious disadvantage. It fails to explain whythat civilization did not simply spread of its own accord; that is, whyEuropean powers should have been obliged to spend the last 500 or so yearsaiming guns at people’s heads in order to force them to adopt it. (Also, ifbeing in a ‘savage’ state was so inherently miserable, why so many of thosesame Westerners, given an informed choice, were so eager to defect to it atthe earliest opportunity.) During the nineteenth-century heyday of European imperialism, everyone seemed more keenly aware of this. While weremember that age as one of naive faith in ‘the inevitable march ofprogress’, liberal, Turgot-style progress was actually never really thedominant narrative in Victorian social theory, let alone political thought.
In fact, European statesmen and intellectuals of that time were just aslikely to be obsessed with the dangers of decadence and disintegration.Many were overt racists who held that most humans are not capable ofprogress, and therefore looked forward to their physical extermination.Even those who did not share such views tended to feel that Enlightenmentschemes for improving the human condition had been catastrophicallynaive. Social theory, as we know it today, emerged largely from the ranks ofsuch reactionary thinkers, who – looking back over their shoulders at theturbulent consequences of the French Revolution – were less concernedwith disasters being visited on peoples overseas than on growing miseryand public unrest at home. As a result, the social sciences were conceivedand organized around two core questions: (1) what had gone wrong with theproject of Enlightenment, with the unity of scientiﬁc and moral progress,and with schemes for the improvement of human society? And: (2) why is itthat well-meaning attempts to ﬁx society’s problems so often end upmaking things even worse?
Why, these conservative thinkers asked, did it prove so difﬁcult forEnlightenment revolutionaries to put their ideas into practice? Why couldn’twe just imagine a more rational social order and then legislate it intoexistence? Why did the passion for liberty, equality and fraternity end upproducing the Terror? There must surely be some underlying reasons.
If nothing else, these preoccupations help to explain the continuedrelevance of an otherwise not particularly successful eighteenth-centurySwiss musician named Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Those primarily concernedwith the ﬁrst question saw him as the ﬁrst to ask it in a quintessentiallymodern way. Those mainly concerned with the second were able torepresent him as the ultimate clueless villain, a simple-mindedrevolutionary who felt that the established order, being irrational, couldsimply be brushed aside. Many held Rousseau personally responsible forthe guillotine. By contrast, few nowadays read the ‘traditionalists’ of thenineteenth century, but they’re actually important since it is they, not theEnlightenment philosophes, who are really responsible for modern socialtheory. It’s long been recognized that almost all the great issues of modern social science – tradition, solidarity, authority, status, alienation, the sacred
– were ﬁrst raised in the works of men like the theocratic Vicomte de Bonald, the monarchist Comte de Maistre, or the Whig politician andphilosopher Edmund Burke as examples of the kind of stubborn socialrealities which they felt that Enlightenment thinkers, and Rousseau inparticular, had refused to take seriously, with (they insisted) disastrousresults. 
These nineteenth-century debates between radicals and reactionariesnever really ended; they keep resurfacing in different forms. Nowadays, forinstance, those on the right are more likely to see themselves as defendersof Enlightenment values, and those on the left its most ardent critics. Butover the course of the argument all parties have come to agree on one keypoint: that there was indeed something called ‘the Enlightenment’, that itmarked a fundamental break in human history, and that the American andFrench Revolutions were in some sense the result of this rupture. TheEnlightenment is seen as introducing a possibility that had simply notexisted before: that of self-conscious projects for reshaping society inaccord with some rational ideal. That is, of genuine revolutionary politics.Obviously, insurrections and visionary movements had existed before theeighteenth century. No one could deny that. But such pre-Enlightenmentsocial movements could now largely be dismissed as so many examples ofpeople insisting on a return to certain ‘ancient ways’ (that they had oftenjust made up), or else claiming to act on a vision from God (or the localequivalent).
Pre-Enlightenment societies, or so this argument goes, were ‘traditional’societies, founded on community, status, authority and the sacred. Theywere societies in which human beings did not ultimately act for themselves,individually or collectively. Rather, they were slaves of custom; or, at best,agents of inexorable social forces which they projected on to the cosmos inthe form of gods, ancestors or other supernatural powers. Supposedly, onlymodern, post-Enlightenment people had the capacity to self-consciouslyintervene in history and change its course; on this everyone suddenlyseemed to agree, no matter how virulently they might disagree aboutwhether it was a good idea to do so.
All this might seem a bit of a caricature, and only a minority of authorswere willing to state matters quite so bluntly. Yet most modern thinkershave clearly found it bizarre to attribute self-conscious social projects or historical designs to people of earlier epochs. Generally, such ‘non-modern’folk were considered too simple-minded (not having achieved ‘socialcomplexity’); or to be living in a kind of mystical dreamworld; or, at best,were thought to be simply adapting themselves to their environment at anappropriate level of technology. Anthropology, it must be confessed, did notplay a stellar role here.
For much of the twentieth century, anthropologists tended to describe thesocieties they studied in ahistorical terms, as living in a kind of eternalpresent. Some of this was an effect of the colonial situation under whichmuch ethnographic research was carried out. The British Empire, forinstance, maintained a system of indirect rule in various parts of Africa,India and the Middle East where local institutions like royal courts, earthshrines, associations of clan elders, men’s houses and the like weremaintained in place, indeed ﬁxed by legislation. Major political change –forming a political party, say, or leading a prophetic movement – was inturn entirely illegal, and anyone who tried to do such things was likely to beput in prison. This obviously made it easier to describe the peopleanthropologists studied as having a way of life that was timeless andunchanging.
Since historical events are by deﬁnition unpredictable, it seemed morescientiﬁc to study those phenomena one could in fact predict: the things thatkept happening, over and over, in roughly the same way. In a Senegalese orBurmese village this might mean describing the daily round, seasonalcycles, rites of passage, patterns of dynastic succession, or the growing andsplitting of villages, always emphasizing how the same structure ultimatelyendured. Anthropologists wrote this way because they consideredthemselves scientists (‘structural-functionalists’, in the jargon of the day).In doing so they made it much easier for those reading their descriptions toimagine that the people being studied were quite the opposite of scientists:that they were trapped in a mythological universe where nothing changedand very little really happened. When Mircea Eliade, the great Romanianhistorian of religion, proposed that ‘traditional’ societies lived in ‘cyclicaltime’, innocent of history, he was simply drawing the obvious conclusion.As a matter of fact, he went even further.
In traditional societies, according to Eliade, everything important hasalready happened. All the great founding gestures go back to mythic times,the illo tempore,1 the dawn of everything, when animals could talk or turn 
into humans, sky and earth were not yet separated, and it was possible tocreate genuinely new things (marriage, or cooking, or war). People living inthis mental world, he felt, saw their own actions as simply repeating thecreative gestures of gods and ancestors in less powerful ways, or asinvoking primordial powers through ritual. According to Eliade, historicalevents thus tended to merge into archetypes. If anyone in what heconsidered a traditional society does do something remarkable – establishesor destroys a city, creates a unique piece of music – the deed will eventuallyend up being attributed to some mythic ﬁgure anyway. The alternativenotion, that history is actually going somewhere (the Last Days, Judgment,Redemption), is what Eliade referred to as ‘linear time’, in which historicalevents take on signiﬁcance in relation to the future, not just the past.
And this ‘linear’ sense of time, Eliade insisted, was a relatively recentinnovation in human thought, one with catastrophic social andpsychological consequences. In his view, embracing the notion that eventsunfold in cumulative sequences, as opposed to recapitulating some deeperpattern, rendered us less able to weather the vicissitudes of war, injusticeand misfortune, plunging us instead into an age of unprecedented anxietyand, ultimately, nihilism. The political implications of this position were, tosay the least, unsettling. Eliade himself had been close to the fascist IronGuard in his student days, and his basic argument was that the ‘terror ofhistory’ (as he sometimes called it) was introduced by Judaism and the OldTestament – which he saw as paving the way for the further disasters ofEnlightenment thought. Being Jewish, the authors of the present book don’tparticularly appreciate the suggestion that we are somehow to blame foreverything that went wrong in history. Still, for present purposes, what’sstartling is that anyone ever took this sort of argument seriously.
Imagine we tried applying Eliade’s distinction between ‘historical’ and‘traditional’ societies to the full scope of the human past, on the sort ofscale we’ve been covering in the preceding chapters. Would this not have tomean that most of history’s great discoveries – for example the ﬁrstweaving of fabrics, or the ﬁrst navigations of the Paciﬁc Ocean, or theinvention of metallurgy – were made by people who didn’t believe indiscovery or in history? This seems unlikely. The only alternative would beto argue that most human societies only became ‘traditional’ more recently:perhaps they each eventually found a state of equilibrium, settled into it andall came up with a shared ideological framework to justify their newfound condition. Which would mean there actually was some kind of previous illo tempore or time of creation, when all humans were capable of thinking andacting in the kind of highly creative ways we now consider quintessentiallymodern; one of their major achievements apparently being to ﬁnd a way ofabolishing most future prospects of innovation.
Both positions are, self-evidently, quite absurd. 
Why are we entertaining such ideas? Why does it seem so odd, evencounter-intuitive, to imagine people of the remote past as making their ownhistory (even if not under conditions of their own choosing)? Part of theanswer no doubt lies in how we have come to deﬁne science itself, andsocial science in particular.
Social science has been largely a study of the ways in which humanbeings are not free: the way that our actions and understandings might besaid to be determined by forces outside our control. Any account whichappears to show human beings collectively shaping their own destiny, oreven expressing freedom for its own sake, will likely be written off asillusory, awaiting ‘real’ scientiﬁc explanation; or if none is forthcoming(why do people dance?), as outside the scope of social theory entirely. Thisis one reason why most ‘big histories’ place such a strong focus ontechnology. Dividing up the human past according to the primary materialfrom which tools and weapons were made (Stone Age, Bronze Age, IronAge) or else describing it as a series of revolutionary breakthroughs(Agricultural Revolution, Urban Revolution, Industrial Revolution), theythen assume that the technologies themselves largely determine the shapethat human societies will take for centuries to come – or at least until the next abrupt and unexpected breakthrough comes along to change everythingagain.
Now, we are hardly about to deny that technologies play an importantrole in shaping society. Obviously, technologies are important: each newinvention opens up social possibilities that had not existed before. At thesame time, it’s very easy to overstate the importance of new technologies insetting the overall direction of social change. To take an obvious example,the fact that Teotihuacanos or Tlaxcalteca employed stone tools to build andmaintain their cities, while the inhabitants of Mohenjo-daro or Knossosused metal, seems to have made surprisingly little difference to those cities’internal organization or even size. Nor does our evidence support the notion that major innovations always occur in sudden, revolutionary bursts,transforming everything in their wake. (This, as you’ll recall, was one of themain points to emerge from the two chapters we devoted to the origins offarming.)
Nobody, of course, claims that the beginnings of agriculture wereanything quite like, say, the invention of the steam-powered loom or theelectric light bulb. We can be fairly certain there was no Neolithicequivalent of Edmund Cartwright or Thomas Edison, who came up with theconceptual breakthrough that set everything in motion. Still, it often seemsdifﬁcult for contemporary writers to resist the idea that some sort ofsimilarly dramatic break with the past must have occurred. In fact, as we’veseen, what actually took place was nothing like that. Instead of some malegenius realizing his solitary vision, innovation in Neolithic societies wasbased on a collective body of knowledge accumulated over centuries,largely by women, in an endless series of apparently humble but in factenormously signiﬁcant discoveries. Many of those Neolithic discoverieshad the cumulative effect of reshaping everyday life every bit as profoundlyas the automatic loom or lightbulb.
Every time we sit down to breakfast, we are likely to be beneﬁting from adozen such prehistoric inventions. Who was the ﬁrst person to ﬁgure outthat you could make bread rise by the addition of those microorganisms wecall yeasts? We have no idea, but we can be almost certain she was awoman and would most likely not be considered ‘white’ if she tried toimmigrate to a European country today; and we deﬁnitely know herachievement continues to enrich the lives of billions of people. What wealso know is that such discoveries were, again, based on centuries ofaccumulated knowledge and experimentation – recall how the basicprinciples of agriculture were known long before anyone applied themsystematically – and that the results of such experiments were oftenpreserved and transmitted through ritual, games and forms of play (or evenmore, perhaps, at the point where ritual, games and play shade into eachother).
‘Gardens of Adonis’ are a ﬁtting symbol here. Knowledge about thenutritious properties and growth cycles of what would later become staplecrops, feeding vast populations – wheat, rice, corn – was initiallymaintained through ritual play farming of exactly this sort. Nor was thispattern of discovery limited to crops. Ceramics were ﬁrst invented, long before the Neolithic, to make ﬁgurines, miniature models of animals andother subjects, and only later cooking and storage vessels. Mining is ﬁrstattested as a way of obtaining minerals to be used as pigments, with theextraction of metals for industrial use coming only much later.Mesoamerican societies never employed wheeled transport; but we knowthey were familiar with spokes, wheels and axles since they made toyversions of them for children. Greek scientists famously came up with theprinciple of the steam engine, but only employed it to make temple doorsthat appeared to open of their own accord, or similar theatrical illusions.Chinese scientists, equally famously, ﬁrst employed gunpowder forﬁreworks. 
For most of history, then, the zone of ritual play constituted both ascientiﬁc laboratory and, for any given society, a repertory of knowledgeand techniques which might or might not be applied to pragmatic problems.Recall, for example, the ‘Little Old Men’ of the Osage and how theycombined research and speculation on the principles of nature with themanagement and periodic reform of their constitutional order; how theysaw these as ultimately the same project and kept careful (oral) records oftheir deliberations. Did the Neolithic town of Çatalhöyük or the Tripolyemega-sites host similar colleges of ‘Little Old Women’? We cannot knowfor certain, but it strikes us as quite likely, given the shared rhythms ofsocial and technical innovation that we observe in each case and the attention to female themes in their art and ritual. If we are trying to framemore interesting questions to ask of history, this might be one: is there apositive correlation between what is usually called ‘gender equality’ (whichmight better be termed, simply, ‘women’s freedom’) and the degree ofinnovation in a given society?
Choosing to describe history the other way round, as a series of abrupttechnological revolutions, each followed by long periods when we wereprisoners of our own creations, has consequences. Ultimately it is a way ofrepresenting our species as decidedly less thoughtful, less creative, less freethan we actually turn out to have been. It means not describing history as acontinual series of new ideas and innovations, technical or otherwise,during which different communities made collective decisions about whichtechnologies they saw ﬁt to apply to everyday purposes, and which to keepconﬁned to the domain of experimentation or ritual play. What is true oftechnological creativity is, of course, even more true of social creativity. 
One of the most striking patterns we discovered while researching this book
–
 indeed, one of the patterns that felt most like a genuine breakthrough to us

–
 was how, time and again in human history, that zone of ritual play hasalso acted as a site of social experimentation – even, in some ways, as anencyclopaedia of social possibilities.


We are not the ﬁrst to suggest this. In the mid twentieth century, a Britishanthropologist named A. M. Hocart proposed that monarchy andinstitutions of government were originally derived from rituals designed tochannel powers of life from the cosmos into human society. He evensuggested at one point that ‘the ﬁrst kings must have been dead kings’,2 
and that individuals so honoured only really became sacred rulers at theirfunerals. Hocart was considered an oddball by his fellow anthropologistsand never managed to secure a permanent job at a major university. Manyaccused him of being unscientiﬁc, just engaging in idle speculation.Ironically, as we’ve seen, it is the results of contemporary archaeologicalscience that now oblige us to start taking his speculations seriously. To theastonishment of many, but much as Hocart predicted, the Upper Palaeolithicreally has produced evidence of grand burials, carefully staged forindividuals who indeed seem to have attracted spectacular riches andhonours, largely in death.
The principle doesn’t just apply to monarchy or aristocracy, but to otherinstitutions as well. We have made the case that private property ﬁrstappears as a concept in sacred contexts, as do police functions and powersof command, along with (in later times) a whole panoply of formaldemocratic procedures, like election and sortition, which were eventuallydeployed to limit such powers.
Here is where things get complicated. To say that, for most of humanhistory, the ritual year served as a kind of compendium of socialpossibilities (as it did in the European Middle Ages, for instance, whenhierarchical pageants alternated with rambunctious carnivals), doesn’t reallydo the matter justice. This is because festivals are already seen asextraordinary, somewhat unreal, or at the very least as departures from theeveryday order. Whereas, in fact, the evidence we have from Palaeolithictimes onwards suggests that many – perhaps even most – people did notmerely imagine or enact different social orders at different times of year,but actually lived in them for extended periods of time. The contrast withour present situation could not be more stark. Nowadays, most of us ﬁnd it increasingly difﬁcult even to picture what an alternative economic or socialorder would be like. Our distant ancestors seem, by contrast, to have movedregularly back and forth between them.
If something did go terribly wrong in human history – and given thecurrent state of the world, it’s hard to deny something did – then perhaps itbegan to go wrong precisely when people started losing that freedom toimagine and enact other forms of social existence, to such a degree thatsome now feel this particular type of freedom hardly even existed, or wasbarely exercised, for the greater part of human history. Even those fewanthropologists, such as Pierre Clastres and later Christopher Boehm, whoargue that humans were always able to imagine alternative socialpossibilities, conclude – rather oddly – that for roughly 95 per cent of ourspecies’ history those same humans recoiled in horror from all possiblesocial worlds but one: the small-scale society of equals. Our only dreamswere nightmares: terrible visions of hierarchy, domination and the state. Infact, as we’ve seen, this is clearly not the case.
The example of Eastern Woodlands societies in North America, exploredin our last chapter, suggests a more useful way to frame the problem. Wemight ask why, for example, it proved possible for their ancestors to turntheir backs on the legacy of Cahokia, with its overweening lords andpriests, and to reorganize themselves into free republics; yet when theirFrench interlocutors effectively tried to follow suit and rid themselves oftheir own ancient hierarchies, the result seemed so disastrous. No doubtthere are quite a number of reasons. But for us, the key point to remember isthat we are not talking here about ‘freedom’ as an abstract ideal or formalprinciple (as in ‘Liberty, Equality and Fraternity!’).3 Over the course of these chapters we have instead talked about basic forms of social libertywhich one might actually put into practice: (1) the freedom to move awayor relocate from one’s surroundings; (2) the freedom to ignore or disobeycommands issued by others; and (3) the freedom to shape entirely newsocial realities, or shift back and forth between different ones.
What we can now see is that the ﬁrst two freedoms – to relocate, and todisobey commands – often acted as a kind of scaffolding for the third, morecreative one. Let us clarify some of the ways in which this ‘propping-up’ ofthe third freedom actually worked. As long as the ﬁrst two freedoms weretaken for granted, as they were in many North American societies whenEuropeans ﬁrst encountered them, the only kings that could exist were always, in the last resort, play kings. If they overstepped the line, theirerstwhile subjects could always ignore them or move someplace else. Thesame would go for any other hierarchy of ofﬁces or system of authority.Similarly, a police force that operated for only three months of the year, andwhose membership rotated annually, was in a certain sense a play policeforce – which makes it slightly less bizarre that their members weresometimes recruited directly from the ranks of ritual clowns.4 

It’s clear that something about human societies really has changed here,and quite profoundly. The three basic freedoms have gradually receded, tothe point where a majority of people living today can barely comprehendwhat it might be like to live in a social order based on them.
How did it happen? How did we get stuck? And just how stuck are wereally? 
‘There is no way out of the imagined order,’ writes Yuval Noah Harari inhis book Sapiens. ‘When we break down our prison walls and run towardsfreedom’, he goes on, ‘we are in fact running into the more spaciousexercise yard of a bigger prison.’5 As we saw in our ﬁrst chapter, he is notalone in reaching this conclusion. Most people who write history on a grandscale seem to have decided that, as a species, we are well and truly stuckand there is really no escape from the institutional cages we’ve made forourselves. Harari, once again echoing Rousseau, seems to have captured theprevailing mood.
We’ll come back to this point, but for now we want to think a bit furtherabout this ﬁrst question: how did it happen? To some degree this mustremain a matter for speculation. Asking the right questions may eventuallysharpen our understanding, but for now the material at our disposal,especially for the early phases of the process, is still too sparse andambiguous to provide deﬁnitive answers. The most we can offer are somepreliminary suggestions, or points of departure, based on the argumentspresented in this book; and perhaps we can also begin to see more clearlywhere others since the time of Rousseau have been going wrong.
One important factor would seem to be the gradual division of humansocieties into what are sometimes referred to as ‘culture areas’; that is, theprocess by which neighbouring groups began deﬁning themselves againsteach other and, typically, exaggerating their differences. Identity came to beseen as a value in itself, setting in motion processes of cultural schismogenesis. As we saw in the case of Californian foragers and theiraristocratic neighbours on the Northwest Coast, such acts of cultural refusalcould also be self-conscious acts of political contestation, marking theboundary (in this case) between societies where inter-group warfare,competitive feasting and household bondage were rejected – as in thoseparts of Aboriginal California closest to the Northwest Coast – and wherethey were accepted, even celebrated, as quintessential features of social life.Archaeologists, taking a longer view, see a proliferation of such regionalculture areas, especially from the end of the last Ice Age on, but are often ata loss to explain why they emerged or what constitutes a boundary betweenthem. 
Still, this appears to have been an epochal development. Recall, forexample, how post-Ice Age hunter-gatherers, especially in coastal orwoodland regions, were enjoying something of a Golden Age. There appearto have been all sorts of local experiments, reﬂected in a proliferation ofopulent burials and monumental architecture, the social functions of whichoften remain enigmatic: from shell-built ‘amphitheatres’ along the Gulf ofMexico to the great storehouses of Sannai Maruyama in J.mon Japan, orthe so-called ‘Giants’ Churches’ of the Bothnian Sea. It is among suchMesolithic populations that we often ﬁnd not just the multiplication ofdistinct culture areas, but also the ﬁrst clear archaeological indications ofcommunities divided into permanent ranks, sometimes accompanied byinterpersonal violence, even warfare. In some cases this may already havemeant the stratiﬁcation of households into aristocrats, commoners andslaves. In others, quite different forms of hierarchy may have taken root.Some appear to have become, effectively, ﬁxed in place.
The role of warfare warrants further discussion here, because violence isoften the route by which forms of play take on more permanent features.For example, the kingdoms of the Natchez or Shilluk might have beenlargely theatrical affairs, their rulers unable to issue orders that would beobeyed even a mile or two away; but if someone was arbitrarily killed aspart of a theatrical display, that person remained deﬁnitively dead even afterthe performance was over. It’s an almost absurdly obvious point to make,but it matters. Play kings cease to be play kings precisely when they startkilling people; which perhaps also helps to explain the excesses of rituallysanctioned violence that so often ensued during transitions from one state tothe other. The same is true of warfare. As Elaine Scarry points out, two communities might choose to resolve a dispute by partaking in a contest,and often they do; but the ultimate difference between war (or ‘contests ofinjuring’, as she puts it) and most other kinds of contest is that anyonekilled or disﬁgured in a war remains so, even after the contest ends.6 

Still, we must be cautious. While human beings have always beencapable of physically attacking one another (and it’s difﬁcult to ﬁndexamples of societies where no one ever attacks anyone else, under anycircumstances), there’s no actual reason to assume that war has alwaysexisted. Technically, war refers not just to organized violence but to a kindof contest between two clearly demarcated sides. As Raymond Kelly hasadroitly pointed out, it’s based on a logical principle that’s by no meansnatural or self-evident, which states that major violence involves two teams,and any member of one team treats all members of the other as equaltargets. Kelly calls this the principle of ‘social substitutability’7 – that is, ifa Hatﬁeld kills a McCoy and the McCoys retaliate, it doesn’t have to beagainst the actual murderer; any Hatﬁeld is fair game. In the same way, ifthere is a war between France and Germany, any French soldier can kill anyGerman soldier, and vice versa. The murder of entire populations is simplytaking this same logic one step further. There is nothing particularlyprimordial about such arrangements; certainly, there is no reason to believethey are in any sense hardwired into the human psyche. On the contrary, it’salmost invariably necessary to employ some combination of ritual, drugsand psychological techniques to convince people, even adolescent males, tokill and injure each other in such systematic yet indiscriminate ways.
It would seem that for most of human history, no one saw much reason todo such things; or if they did, it was rare. Systematic studies of thePalaeolithic record offer little evidence of warfare in this speciﬁc sense.8 
Moreover, since war was always something of a game, it’s not entirelysurprising that it has manifested itself in sometimes more theatrical andsometimes more deadly variations. Ethnography provides plenty ofexamples of what could best be described as play war: either with non-deadly weapons or, more often, battles involving thousands on each sidewhere the number of casualties after a day’s ‘ﬁghting’ amount to perhapstwo or three. Even in Homeric-style warfare, most participants werebasically there as an audience while individual heroes taunted, jeered andoccasionally threw javelins or shot arrows at one another, or engaged induels. At the other extreme, as we’ve seen, there is an increasing amount of archaeological evidence for outright massacres, such as those that tookplace among Neolithic village dwellers in central Europe after the end ofthe last Ice Age.
What strikes us is just how uneven such evidence is. Periods of intenseinter-group violence alternate with periods of peace, often lasting centuries,in which there is little or no evidence for destructive conﬂict of any kind.War did not become a constant of human life after the adoption of farming;indeed, long periods of time exist in which it appears to have beensuccessfully abolished. Yet it had a stubborn tendency to reappear, if onlymany generations later. At this point another new question comes intofocus. Was there a relationship between external warfare and the internalloss of freedoms that opened the way, ﬁrst to systems of ranking and thenlater on to large-scale systems of domination, like those we discussed in thelater chapters of this book: the ﬁrst dynastic kingdoms and empires, such asthose of the Maya, Shang or Inca? And if so, how direct was thiscorrelation? One thing we’ve learned is that it’s a mistake to beginanswering such questions by assuming that these ancient polities weresimply archaic versions of our modern states.
The state, as we know it today, results from a distinct combination ofelements – sovereignty, bureaucracy and a competitive political ﬁeld –which have entirely separate origins. In our thought experiment of twochapters ago, we showed how those elements map directly on to basicforms of social power which can operate at any scale of human interaction,from the family or household all the way up to the Roman Empire or thesuper-kingdom of Tawantinsuyu. Sovereignty, bureaucracy and politics aremagniﬁcations of elementary types of domination, grounded respectively inthe use of violence, knowledge and charisma. Ancient political systems –especially those, such as the Olmec or Chavín de Huántar, that eludedeﬁnition in terms of ‘chiefdoms’ and ‘states’ – can often be understood better in terms of how they developed one axis of social power to anextraordinary degree (e.g. charismatic political contests and spectacles inthe Olmec case, or control of esoteric knowledge in Chavín). These arewhat we termed ‘ﬁrst-order regimes’.
Where two axes of power were developed and formalized into a singlesystem of domination we can begin to talk of ‘second-order regimes’. Thearchitects of Egypt’s Old Kingdom, for example, armed the principle ofsovereignty with a bureaucracy and managed to extend it across a large territory. By contrast, the rulers of ancient Mesopotamian city-states madeno direct claims to sovereignty, which for them resided properly in heaven.When they engaged in wars over land or irrigation systems, it was only assecondary agents of the gods. Instead they combined charismaticcompetition with a highly developed administrative order. The ClassicMaya were different again, conﬁning administrative activities largely to themonitoring of cosmic affairs, while basing their earthly power on a potentfusion of sovereignty and inter-dynastic politics.
Insofar as these and other polities commonly regarded as ‘early states’(Shang China, for instance) really share any common features, they seem tolie in altogether different areas – which brings us back to the question ofwarfare, and the loss of freedoms within society. All of them deployedspectacular violence at the pinnacle of the system (whether that violencewas conceived as a direct extension of royal sovereignty or carried out atthe behest of divinities); and all to some degree modelled their centres ofpower – the court or palace – on the organization of patriarchal households.Is this merely a coincidence? On reﬂection, the same combination offeatures can be found in most later kingdoms or empires, such as the Han,Aztec or Roman. In each case there was a close connection between the patriarchal household and military might. But why exactly should this bethe case? 
The question has proved difﬁcult to answer in all but superﬁcial terms,partly because our own intellectual traditions oblige us to use what is, ineffect, imperial language to do so; and the language already implies anexplanation, even a justiﬁcation, for much of what we are really trying toaccount for here. That is why, in the course of this book, we sometimes feltthe need to develop our own, more neutral (dare we say scientiﬁc?) list ofbaseline human freedoms and forms of domination; because existingdebates almost invariably begin with terms derived from Roman Law, andfor a number of reasons this is problematic.
The Roman Law conception of natural freedom is essentially based onthe power of the individual (by implication, a male head of household) todispose of his property as he sees ﬁt. In Roman Law property isn’t evenexactly a right, since rights are negotiated with others and involve mutualobligations; it’s simply power – the blunt reality that someone in possessionof a thing can do anything he wants with it, except that which is limited ‘byforce or law’. This formulation has some peculiarities that jurists have struggled with ever since, as it implies freedom is essentially a state ofprimordial exception to the legal order. It also implies that property is not aset of understandings between people over who gets to use or look afterthings, but rather a relation between a person and an object characterized byabsolute power. What does it mean to say one has the natural right to doanything one wants with a hand grenade, say, except those things one isn’tallowed to do? Who would come up with such an odd formulation?
An answer is suggested by the West Indian sociologist Orlando Patterson,who points out that Roman Law conceptions of property (and hence offreedom) essentially trace back to slave law.9 The reason it is possible toimagine property as a relationship of domination between a person and athing is because, in Roman Law, the power of the master rendered the slavea thing (res, meaning an object), not a person with social rights or legalobligations to anyone else. Property law, in turn, was largely about thecomplicated situations that might arise as a result. It is important to recall,for a moment, who these Roman jurists actually were that laid down thebasis for our current legal order – our theories of justice, the language ofcontract and torts, the distinction of public and private and so forth. Whilethey spent their public lives making sober judgments as magistrates, theylived their private lives in households where they not only had near-totalauthority over their wives, children and other dependants, but also had alltheir needs taken care of by dozens, perhaps hundreds of slaves.
Slaves trimmed their hair, carried their towels, fed their pets, repairedtheir sandals, played music at their dinner parties and instructed theirchildren in history and maths. At the same time, in terms of legal theorythese slaves were classiﬁed as captive foreigners who, conquered in battle,had forfeited rights of any kind. As a result, the Roman jurist was free torape, torture, mutilate or kill any of them at any time and in any way he hada mind to, without the matter being considered anything other than a privateaffair. (Only under the reign of Tiberius were any restrictions imposed onwhat a master could do to a slave, and what this meant was simply thatpermission from a local magistrate had to be obtained before a slave couldbe ripped apart by wild animals; other forms of execution could still beimposed at the owner’s whim.) On the one hand, freedom and liberty wereprivate affairs; on the other, private life was marked by the absolute powerof the patriarch over conquered people who were considered his private property.10 

The fact that most Roman slaves were not prisoners of war, in the literalsense, doesn’t really make much difference here. What’s important is thattheir legal status was deﬁned in those terms. What is both striking andrevealing, for our present purposes, is how in Roman jurisprudence thelogic of war – which dictates that enemies are interchangeable, and if theysurrendered they could either be killed or rendered ‘socially dead’, sold ascommodities – and, therefore, the potential for arbitrary violence wasinserted into the most intimate sphere of social relations, including therelations of care that made domestic life possible. Thinking back toexamples like the ‘capturing societies’ of Amazonia or the process bywhich dynastic power took root in ancient Egypt, we can begin to see howimportant that particular nexus of violence and care has been. Rome tookthe entanglement to new extremes, and its legacy still shapes our basicconcepts of social structure.
Our very word ‘family’ shares a root with the Latin famulus, meaning‘house slave’, via familia, which originally referred to everyone under thedomestic authority of a single paterfamilias or male head of household. Domus, the Latin word for ‘household’, in turn gives us not only ‘domestic’and ‘domesticated’ but dominium, which was the technical term for theemperor’s sovereignty as well as a citizen’s power over private property.Through that we arrive at (literally, ‘familiar’) notions of what it means tobe ‘dominant’, to possess ‘dominion’ and to ‘dominate’. Let us follow thisline of thought a little further.
We’ve seen how, in various parts of the world, direct evidence of warfareand massacres – including the carrying-off of captives – can be detectedlong before the appearance of kingdoms or empires. Much harder toascertain, for such early periods of history, is what happened to captiveenemies: were they killed, incorporated or left suspended somewhere inbetween? As we learned from various Amerindian cases, things may notalways be entirely clear-cut. There were often multiple possibilities. It’sinstructive, in this context, to return one last time to the case of the Wendatin the age of Kandiaronk, since this was one society that seemed determinedto avoid ambiguity in such matters.
In certain ways Wendat, and Iroquoian societies in general around thattime, were extraordinarily warlike. There appear to have been bloodyrivalries fought out in many northern parts of the Eastern Woodlands evenbefore European settlers began supplying indigenous factions with muskets, resulting in the ‘Beaver Wars’. The early Jesuits were often appalled bywhat they saw, but they also noted that the ostensible reasons for wars wereentirely different from those they were used to. All Wendat wars were, infact, ‘mourning wars’, carried out to assuage the grief felt by close relativesof someone who had been killed. Typically, a war party would strike againsttraditional enemies, bringing back a few scalps and a small number ofprisoners. Captive women and children would be adopted. The fate of menwas largely up to the mourners, particularly the women, and appeared tooutsiders at least to be entirely arbitrary. If the mourners felt it appropriate amale captive might be given a name, even the name of the original victim.The captive enemy would henceforth become that other person and, after afew years’ trial period, be treated as a full member of society. If for anyreason that did not happen, however, he suffered a very different fate. For amale warrior taken prisoner, the only alternative to full adoption intoWendat society was excruciating death by torture.
Jesuits found the details shocking and fascinating. What they observed,sometimes at ﬁrst hand, was a slow, public and highly theatrical use ofviolence. True, they conceded, the Wendat torture of captives was no morecruel than the kind directed against enemies of the state back home inFrance. What seems to have really appalled them, however, was not somuch the whipping, boiling, branding, cutting-up – even in some casescooking and eating – of the enemy, so much as the fact that almost everyonein a Wendat village or town took part, even women and children. Thesuffering might go on for days, with the victim periodically resuscitatedonly to endure further ordeals, and it was very much a communal affair.11 
The violence seems all the more extraordinary once we recall how thesesame Wendat societies refused to spank children, directly punish thieves ormurderers, or take any measure against their own members that smacked ofarbitrary authority. In virtually all other areas of social life they wererenowned for solving their problems through calm and reasoned debate.
Now, it would be easy to make an argument that repressed aggressionmust be vented in one way or another, so that orgies of communal tortureare simply the necessary ﬂipside of a non-violent community; and somecontemporary scholars do make this point. But it doesn’t really work. Infact, Iroquoia seems to be precisely one of those regions of North Americawhere violence ﬂared up only during certain speciﬁc historical periods andthen largely disappeared in others. In what archaeologists term the ‘Middle Woodland’ phase, for instance, between 100 BC and AD 500 – correspondingroughly to the heyday of the Hopewell civilization – there seems to havebeen general peace.12 Later on, signs of endemic warfare reappear. Clearly,at some points in their history people living in this region found effectiveways to ensure that vendettas didn’t escalate into a spiral of retaliation oractual warfare (the Haudenosaunee story of the Great Law of the Peaceseems to be about precisely such a moment); at other times, the systembroke down and the possibility of sadistic cruelty returned.
What, then, was the meaning of these theatres of violence? One way toapproach the question is to compare them with what was happening inEurope around the same time. As the Quebecois historian Denys Delâgepoints out, Wendat who visited France were equally appalled by the torturesexhibited during public punishments and executions, but what struck them as most remarkable is that ‘the French whipped, hanged, and put to death men from among themselves’, rather than external enemies. The point istelling, as in seventeenth-century Europe, Delâge notes, 
… almost all punishment, including the death penalty, involvedsevere physical suffering: wearing an iron collar, being whipped,having a hand cut off, or being branded … It was a ritual thatmanifested power in a conspicuous way, thereby revealing theexistence of an internal war. The sovereign incarnated a superiorpower that transcended his subjects, one that they were compelled torecognise … While Amerindian cannibal rituals showed the desireto take over the strength and courage of the alien so as to combathim better, the European ritual revealed the existence of adissymmetry, an irrevocable imbalance of power.13 

Wendat punitive actions against war captives (those not taken in foradoption) required the community to become a single body, uniﬁed by itscapacity for violence. In France, by contrast, ‘the people’ were uniﬁed aspotential victims of the king’s violence. But the contrasts run deeper still.
As a Wendat traveller observed of the French system, anyone – guilty orinnocent – might end up being made a public example. Among the Wendatthemselves, however, violence was ﬁrmly excluded from the realm offamily and household. A captive warrior might either be treated with lovingcare and affection or be the object of the worst treatment imaginable. No middle ground existed. Prisoner sacriﬁce was not merely about reinforcingthe solidarity of the group but also proclaimed the internal sanctity of thefamily and the domestic realm as spaces of female governance whereviolence, politics and rule by command did not belong. Wendat households,in other words, were deﬁned in exactly opposite terms to the Romanfamilia. 
In this particular respect, French society under the Ancien Régimepresents a rather similar picture to imperial Rome – at least, when both areplaced in the light of the Wendat example. In both cases, household andkingdom shared a common model of subordination. Each was made in theother’s image, with the patriarchal family serving as a template for theabsolute power of kings, and vice versa.14 Children were to be submissive to their parents, wives to husbands, and subjects to rulers whose authoritycame from God. In each case the superior party was expected to inﬂict sternchastisement when he considered it appropriate: that is, to exercise violencewith impunity. All this, moreover, was assumed to be bound up withfeelings of love and affection. Ultimately, the house of the Bourbonmonarchs – like the palace of an Egyptian pharaoh, Roman emperor, Aztectlatoani or Sapa Inca – was not merely a structure of domination but alsoone of care, where a small army of courtiers laboured night and day toattend to the king’s every physical need and prevent him, as much as washumanly possible, from ever feeling anything but divine.
In all these cases, the bonds of violence and care extended downwards aswell as upwards. We can do no better than put it in words made famous byKing James I of England in The True Law of Free Monarchies (1598): 
As the father, of his fatherly duty, is to care for the nourishing,education, and virtuous government of his children; even so is theKing bound to care for all his subjects … As the father’s wrath andcorrection on any of his children that offendeth, ought to be afatherly chastisement seasoned with pity, so long as there is anyhope of amendment in them; so ought the King towards any of hislieges that offend in that measure … As the father’s chief joy oughtto be in procuring his children’s welfare, rejoicing in their weal,sorrowing and pitying at their evil, to hazard for their safety … soought a good Prince think of his People. 
Public torture, in seventeenth-century Europe, created searing, unforgettablespectacles of pain and suffering in order to convey the message that asystem in which husbands could brutalize wives, and parents beat children,was ultimately a form of love. Wendat torture, in the same period of history,created searing, unforgettable spectacles of pain and suffering in order tomake clear that no form of physical chastisement should ever becountenanced inside a community or household. Violence and care, in theWendat case, were to be entirely separated. Seen in this light, the distinctivefeatures of Wendat prisoner torture come into focus.
It seems to us that this connection – or better perhaps, confusion –between care and domination is utterly critical to the larger question of howwe lost the ability freely to recreate ourselves by recreating our relationswith one another. It is critical, that is, to understanding how we got stuck,and why these days we can hardly envisage our own past or future asanything other than a transition from smaller to larger cages. 
In the course of writing this book, we have tried to strike a certain balance.It would be intuitive for an archaeologist and an anthropologist, immersedin our subject matter, to take on all the scholarly views about, say,Stonehenge, the ‘Uruk expansion’ or Iroquoian social organization andexplain our preference for one interpretation over another, or venture adifferent one. This is how the search for truth is normally conducted in theacademy. But had we tried to outline or refute every existing interpretationof the material we covered, this book would have been two or three timesthe size, and likely would have left the reader with a sense that the authorsare engaged in a constant battle with demons who were in fact two inchestall. So instead we have tried to map out what we think really happened,and to point out the ﬂaws in other scholars’ arguments only insofar as theyseemed to reﬂect more widespread misconceptions.
Perhaps the most stubborn misconception we’ve been tackling has to dowith scale. It does seem to be received wisdom in many quarters, academicand otherwise, that structures of domination are the inevitable result ofpopulations scaling up by orders of magnitude; that is, that a necessarycorrespondence exists between social and spatial hierarchies. Time andagain we found ourselves confronted with writing which simply assumesthat the larger and more densely populated the social group, the more‘complex’ the system needed to keep it organized. Complexity, in turn, is still often used as a synonym for hierarchy. Hierarchy, in turn, is used as aeuphemism for chains of command (the ‘origins of the state’), which meanthat as soon as large numbers of people decided to live in one place or join acommon project, they must necessarily abandon the second freedom – torefuse orders – and replace it with legal mechanisms for, say, beating orlocking up those who don’t do as they’re told.
As we’ve seen, none of these assumptions are theoretically essential, andhistory tends not to bear them out. Carole Crumley, an anthropologist andexpert on Iron Age Europe, has been pointing this out for years: complexsystems don’t have to be organized top-down, either in the natural or in thesocial world. That we tend to assume otherwise probably tells us moreabout ourselves than the people or phenomena that we’re studying.15 
Neither is she alone in making this point. But more often than not, suchobservations have fallen on deaf ears. 
It’s probably time to start listening, because ‘exceptions’ are fastbeginning to outnumber the rules. Take cities. It was once assumed that therise of urban life marked some kind of historical turnstile, wherebyeveryone who passed through had to permanently surrender their basicfreedoms and submit to the rule of faceless administrators, stern priests,paternalistic kings or warrior-politicians – simply to avert chaos (orcognitive overload). To view human history through such a lens today isreally not all that different from taking on the mantle of a modern-day KingJames, since the overall effect is to portray the violence and inequalities ofmodern society as somehow arising naturally from structures of rationalmanagement and paternalistic care: structures designed for humanpopulations who, we are asked to believe, became suddenly incapable oforganizing themselves once their numbers expanded above a certainthreshold. 
Not only do such views lack a sound basis in human psychology. Theyare also difﬁcult to reconcile with archaeological evidence of how citiesactually began in many parts of the world: as civic experiments on a grandscale, which frequently lacked the expected features of administrativehierarchy and authoritarian rule. We do not possess an adequateterminology for these early cities. To call them ‘egalitarian’, as we’ve seen,could mean quite a number of different things. It might imply an urbanparliament and co-ordinated projects of social housing, as with some pre-Columbian centres in the Americas; or the self-organizing of autonomous households into neighbourhoods and citizens’ assemblies, as withprehistoric mega-sites north of the Black Sea; or, perhaps, the introductionof some explicit notion of equality based on principles of uniformity andsameness, as in Uruk-period Mesopotamia.
None of this variability is surprising once we recall what preceded citiesin each region. That was not, in fact, rudimentary or isolated groups, butfar-ﬂung networks of societies, spanning diverse ecologies, with people,plants, animals, drugs, objects of value, songs and ideas moving betweenthem in endlessly intricate ways. While the individual units weredemographically small, especially at certain times of year, they weretypically organized into loose coalitions or confederacies. At the very least,these were simply the logical outcome of our ﬁrst freedom: to move awayfrom one’s home, knowing one will be received and cared for, even valued,in some distant place. At most they were examples of ‘amphictyony’, inwhich some kind of formal organization was put in charge of the care andmaintenance of sacred places. It seems that Marcel Mauss had a point whenhe argued that we should reserve the term ‘civilization’ for great hospitalityzones such as these. Of course, we are used to thinking of ‘civilization’ assomething that originates in cities – but, armed with new knowledge, itseems more realistic to put things the other way round and to imagine theﬁrst cities as one of those great regional confederacies, compressed into asmall space.
Of course, monarchy, warrior aristocracies or other forms of stratiﬁcationcould also take hold in urban contexts, and often did. When this happenedthe consequences were dramatic. Still, the mere existence of large humansettlements in no way caused these phenomena, and certainly didn’t makethem inevitable. For the origins of these structures of domination we mustlook elsewhere. Hereditary aristocracies were just as likely to exist amongdemographically small or modest-sized groups, such as the ‘heroicsocieties’ of the Anatolian highlands, which took form on the margins ofthe ﬁrst Mesopotamian cities and traded extensively with them. Insofar aswe have evidence for the inception of monarchy as a permanent institutionit seems to lie precisely there, and not in cities. In other parts of the world,some urban populations ventured partway down the road towardsmonarchy, only to turn back. Such was the case at Teotihuacan in the Valleyof Mexico, where the city’s population – having raised the Pyramids of theSun and Moon – then abandoned such aggrandizing projects and embarked instead on a prodigious programme of social housing, providing multi.family apartments for its residents.
Elsewhere, early cities followed the opposite trajectory, starting withneighbourhood councils and popular assemblies and ending up being ruledby warlike dynasts, who then had to maintain an uneasy coexistence witholder institutions of urban governance. Something along these lines tookplace in Early Dynastic Mesopotamia, after the Uruk period: here again theconvergence between systems of violence and systems of care seemscritical. Sumerian temples had always organized their economic existencearound the nurturing and feeding of the gods, embodied in their cult statues,which became surrounded by a whole industry and bureaucracy of welfare.Even more crucially, temples were charitable institutions. Widows, orphans,runaways, those exiled from their kin groups or other support networkswould take refuge there: at Uruk, for example, in the Temple of Inanna,protective goddess of the city, overlooking the great courtyard of the city’sassembly.
The ﬁrst charismatic war-kings attached themselves to such spaces, quiteliterally moving in next door to the residence of the city’s leading deity. Insuch ways, Sumerian monarchs were able to insert themselves intoinstitutional spaces once reserved for the care of the gods, and thus removedfrom the realm of ordinary human relationships. This makes sense becausekings, as the Malagasy proverb puts it, ‘have no relatives’ – or theyshouldn’t, since they are rulers equally of all their subjects. Slaves too haveno kin; they are severed from all prior attachments. In either case, the onlyrecognized social relationships such individuals possess are those based onpower and domination. In structural terms, and as against almost everyoneelse in society, kings and slaves effectively inhabit the same ground. Thedifference lies in which end of the power spectrum they happen to occupy.
We also know that needy individuals, taken into such temple institutions,were supplied with regular rations and put to work on the temple’s landsand in its workshops. The very ﬁrst factories – or, at least, the very ﬁrst weare aware of in history – were charitable institutions of this kind, wheretemple bureaucrats would supply women with wool to spin and weave,supervise the disposal of the product (much of it traded with upland groupsin exchange for wood, stone and metal, unavailable in the river valleys),and provide them with carefully apportioned rations. All this was alreadytrue long before the appearance of kings. As persons dedicated to the gods, these women must originally have had a certain dignity, even a sacredstatus; but already by the time of the ﬁrst written documents, the situationseems to have grown more complicated.
By then, some of those working in Sumerian temples were also warcaptives, or even slaves, who were similarly bereft of family support. Overtime, and perhaps as a result, the status of widows and orphans also appearsto have been downgraded, until the temple institutions came to resemblesomething more like a Victorian poorhouse. How, we might then ask, didthe degradation of women working in the temple factories affect the statusof women more generally? If nothing else, it must have made the prospectof ﬂeeing an abusive domestic arrangement far more daunting. Loss of theﬁrst freedom meant, increasingly, loss of the second. Loss of the secondmeant effacement of the third. If a woman in such a situation attempted tocreate a new cult, a new temple, a new vision of social relations she wouldinstantly be marked as a subversive, a revolutionary; if she attractedfollowers she might well ﬁnd herself confronted by military force.
All this brings into focus another question. Does this newly establishednexus between external violence and internal care – between the most impersonal and the most intimate of human relations – mark the pointwhere everything begins to get confused? Is this an example of howrelations that were once ﬂexible and negotiable ended up getting ﬁxed inplace: an example, in other words, of how we effectively got stuck? If thereis a particular story we should be telling, a big question we should be askingof human history (instead of the ‘origins of social inequality’), is itprecisely this: how did we ﬁnd ourselves stuck in just one form of socialreality, and how did relations based ultimately on violence and dominationcome to be normalized within it? 
Perhaps the scholar who most closely approached this question in the lastcentury was an anthropologist and poet named Franz Steiner, who died in1952. Steiner led a fascinating if tragic life. A brilliant polymath born to aJewish family in Bohemia, he later lived with an Arab family in Jerusalemuntil expelled by the British authorities, conducted ﬁeldwork in theCarpathians and was twice forced by the Nazis to ﬂee the continent, endinghis career – ironically enough – in the south of England. Most of hisimmediate family were killed at Birkenau. Legend has it that he completed800 pages of a monumental doctoral dissertation on the comparativesociology of slavery, only to have the suitcase containing his drafts and research notes stolen on a train. He was friends with, and a romantic rivalto, Elias Canetti, another Jewish exile at Oxford and a successful suitor tothe novelist Iris Murdoch – although two days after she’d accepted hisproposal of marriage, Steiner died of a heart attack. He was forty-three.
The shorter version of Steiner’s doctoral work, which does survive,focuses on what he calls ‘pre-servile institutions’. Poignantly, given his ownlife story, it is a study of what happens in different cultural and historicalsituations to people who become unmoored: those expelled from their clansfor some debt or fault; castaways, criminals, runaways. It can be read as ahistory of how refugees such as himself were ﬁrst welcomed, treated asalmost sacred beings, then gradually degraded and exploited, again muchlike the women working in the Sumerian temple factories. In essence, thestory told by Steiner appears to be precisely about the collapse of what wewould term the ﬁrst basic freedom (to move away or relocate), and how thispaved the way for the loss of the second (the freedom to disobey). It alsoleads us back to a point we made earlier about the progressive division ofthe human social universe into smaller and smaller units, beginning with theappearance of ‘culture areas’ (a fascination of ethnologists in the centralEuropean tradition, in which Steiner ﬁrst trained).
What happens, Steiner asked, when expectations that make freedom ofmovement possible – the norms of hospitality and asylum, civility andshelter – erode? Why does this so often appear to be a catalyst for situationswhere some people can exert arbitrary power over others? Steiner workedhis way in careful detail through cases ranging from the Amazonian Huitotoand East African Safwa to the Tibeto-Burman Lushai. Along the journey hesuggested one possible answer to the question that had so puzzled RobertLowie, and later Clastres: if stateless societies do regularly organizethemselves in such a way that chiefs have no coercive power, then how didtop-down forms of organization ever come into the world to begin with?You’ll recall how both Lowie and Clastres were driven to the same conclusion: that they must have been the product of religious revelation.Steiner provided an alternative route. Perhaps, he suggested, it all goes backto charity.
In Amazonian societies, not only orphans but also widows, the mad,disabled or deformed – if they had no one else to look after them – wereallowed to take refuge in the chief’s residence, where they received a shareof communal meals. To these were occasionally added war captives, especially children taken in raiding expeditions. Among the Safwa orLushai, runaways, debtors, criminals or others needing protection held thesame status as those who surrendered in battle. All became members of the chief’s retinue, and the younger males often took on the role of police-likeenforcers. How much power the chief actually had over his retainers –Steiner uses the Roman Law term potestas, which denotes among otherthings a father’s power of arbitrary command over his dependants and theirproperty – would vary, depending how easy it was for wards to run awayand ﬁnd refuge elsewhere, or to maintain at least some ties with relatives,clans or outsiders willing to stand up for them. How far such henchmencould be relied on to enforce the chief’s will also varied; but the sheerpotential was important.
In all such cases, the process of giving refuge did generally lead to thetransformation of basic domestic arrangements, especially as capturedwomen were incorporated, further reinforcing the potestas of fathers. It is possible to detect something of this logic in almost all historicallydocumented royal courts, which invariably attracted those consideredfreakish or detached. There seems to have been no region of the world,from China to the Andes, where courtly societies did not host suchobviously distinctive individuals; and few monarchs who did not also claimto be the protectors of widows and orphans. One could easily imaginesomething along these lines was already happening in certain hunter-gatherer communities during much earlier periods of history. The physicallyanomalous individuals accorded lavish burials in the last Ice Age must alsohave been the focus of much caring attention while alive. No doubt thereare sequences of development linking such practices to later royal courts –we’ve caught glimpses of them, as in Predynastic Egypt – even if we arestill unable to reconstruct most of the links. 
Steiner may not have foregrounded the issue, but his observations aredirectly relevant to debates about the origins of patriarchy. Feministanthropologists have long argued for a connection between external (largelymale) violence and the transformation of women’s status in the home. Inarchaeological and historical terms, we are only just beginning to gathertogether enough material to begin understanding how that process actuallyworked. 
The research that culminated in this book began almost a decade ago,essentially as a form of play. We pursued it at ﬁrst, it would be fair to say, ina spirit of mild deﬁance towards our more ‘serious’ academicresponsibilities. Mainly we were just curious about how the newarchaeological evidence that had been building up for the last thirty yearsmight change our notions of early human history, especially the parts boundup with debates on the origins of social inequality. Before long, though, werealized that what we were doing was potentially important, because hardlyanyone else in our ﬁelds seemed to be doing this work of synthesis. Often,we found ourselves searching in vain for books that we assumed must existbut, it turns out, simply didn’t – for instance, compendia of early cities thatlacked top-down governance, or accounts of how democratic decision-making was conducted in Africa or the Americas, or comparisons of whatwe’ve called ‘heroic societies’. The literature is riddled with absences. 
We eventually came to realize that this reluctance to synthesize was notsimply a product of reticence on the part of highly specialized scholars,although this is certainly a factor. To some degree it was simply the lack ofan appropriate language. What, for instance, does one even call a ‘citylacking top-down structures of governance’? At the moment there is nocommonly accepted term. Dare one call it a ‘democracy’? A ‘republic’?Such words (like ‘civilization’) are so freighted with historical baggage thatmost archaeologists and anthropologists instinctively recoil from them, andhistorians tend to limit their use to Europe. Does one, then, call it an‘egalitarian city’? Probably not, since to evoke such a term is to invite theobvious demand for proof that the city was ‘really’ egalitarian – whichusually means, in practice, showing that no element of structural inequalityexisted in any aspect of its inhabitants’ lives, including households andreligious arrangements. Since such evidence will rarely, if ever, beforthcoming, the conclusion would have to be that these are not reallyegalitarian cities after all.
By the same logic, one might easily conclude there aren’t really any‘egalitarian societies’, except possibly certain very small foraging bands.Many researchers in the ﬁeld of evolutionary anthropology do, in fact, makeprecisely this argument. But ultimately the result of this kind of thinking isto lump together all ‘non-egalitarian’ cities or indeed all ‘non-egalitariansocieties’, which is a little like saying there’s no meaningful differencebetween a hippie commune and a biker gang, since neither are entirely non.violent. All this achieves, at the end of the day, is to leave us literally at aloss for words when confronted with certain major aspects of humanhistory. We fall strangely mute in the face of any kind of evidence forhumans doing something other than ‘rushing headlong for their chains’.Sensing a sea change in the evidence of the past, we decided to approachthings the other way round.
What this meant, in practice, was reversing a lot of polarities. It meantditching the language of ‘equality’ and ‘inequality’, unless there wasexplicit evidence that ideologies of social equality were actually present onthe ground. It meant asking, for instance, what happens if we accordsigniﬁcance to the 5,000 years in which cereal domestication did not lead to the emergence of pampered aristocracies, standing armies or debt peonage,rather than just the 5,000 in which it did? What happens if we treat therejection of urban life, or of slavery, in certain times and places assomething just as signiﬁcant as the emergence of those same phenomena inothers? In the process, we often found ourselves surprised. We’d never haveguessed, for instance, that slavery was most likely abolished multiple timesin history in multiple places; and that very possibly the same is true of war.Obviously, such abolitions are rarely deﬁnitive. Still, the periods in whichfree or relatively free societies existed are hardly insigniﬁcant. In fact, ifyou bracket the Eurasian Iron Age (which is effectively what we have beendoing here), they represent the vast majority of human social experience.
Social theorists have a tendency to write about the past as if everythingthat happened could have been predicted beforehand. This is somewhatdishonest, since we’re all aware that when we actually try to predict thefuture we almost invariably get it wrong – and this is just as true of socialtheorists as anybody else. Nonetheless, it’s hard to resist the temptation towrite and think as if the current state of the world, in the early twenty-ﬁrstcentury, is the inevitable outcome of the last 10,000 years of history, whilein reality, of course, we have little or no idea what the world will be likeeven in 2075, let alone 2150.
Who knows? Perhaps if our species does endure, and we one day lookbackwards from this as yet unknowable future, aspects of the remote pastthat now seem like anomalies – say, bureaucracies that work on acommunity scale; cities governed by neighbourhood councils; systems ofgovernment where women hold a preponderance of formal positions; orforms of land management based on care-taking rather than ownership and extraction – will seem like the really signiﬁcant breakthroughs, and greatstone pyramids or statues more like historical curiosities. What if we wereto take that approach now and look at, say, Minoan Crete or Hopewell notas random bumps on a road that leads inexorably to states and empires, butas alternative possibilities: roads not taken?
After all, those things really did exist, even if our habitual ways oflooking at the past seem designed to put them at the margins rather than atthe centre of things. Much of this book has been devoted to recalibratingthose scales; to reminding us that people did actually live in those ways,often for many centuries, even millennia. In some ways, such a perspectivemight seem even more tragic than our standard narrative of civilization asthe inevitable fall from grace. It means we could have been living underradically different conceptions of what human society is actually about. Itmeans that mass enslavement, genocide, prison camps, even patriarchy orregimes of wage labour never had to happen. But on the other hand it alsosuggests that, even now, the possibilities for human intervention are fargreater than we’re inclined to think. 
We began this book with a quote which refers to the Greek notion of kairos as one of those occasional moments in a society’s history when its frames ofreference undergo a shift – a metamorphosis of the fundamental principlesand symbols, when the lines between myth and history, science and magicbecome blurred – and, therefore, real change is possible. Philosopherssometimes like to speak of ‘the Event’ – a political revolution, a scientiﬁcdiscovery, an artistic masterpiece – that is, a breakthrough which revealsaspects of reality that had previously been unimaginable but, once seen, cannever be unseen. If so, kairos is the kind of time in which Events are proneto happen.
Societies around the world appear to be cascading towards such a point.This is particularly true of those which, since the First World War, havebeen in the habit of calling themselves ‘Western’. On the one hand,fundamental breakthroughs in the physical sciences, or even artisticexpression, no longer seem to occur with anything like the regularity peoplecame to expect in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Yet atthe same time, our scientiﬁc means of understanding the past, not just ourspecies’ past but that of our planet, has been advancing with dizzyingspeed. Scientists in 2020 are not (as readers of mid-twentieth-century science ﬁction might have hoped) encountering alien civilizations in distantstar systems; but they are encountering radically different forms of societyunder their own feet, some forgotten and newly rediscovered, others morefamiliar, but now understood in entirely new ways.
In developing the scientiﬁc means to know our own past, we haveexposed the mythical substructure of our ‘social science’ – what onceappeared unassailable axioms, the stable points around which our self-knowledge is organized, are scattering like mice. What is the purpose of allthis new knowledge, if not to reshape our conceptions of who we are andwhat we might yet become? If not, in other words, to rediscover themeaning of our third basic freedom: the freedom to create new and differentforms of social reality?
Myth in itself is not the problem here. It shouldn’t be mistaken for bad orinfantile science. Just as all societies have their science, all societies havetheir myths. Myth is the way in which human societies give structure andmeaning to experience. But the larger mythic structures of history we’vebeen deploying for the last several centuries simply don’t work any more;they are impossible to reconcile with the evidence now before our eyes, andthe structures and meanings they encourage are tawdry, shop-worn andpolitically disastrous.
No doubt, for a while at least, very little will change. Whole ﬁelds ofknowledge – not to mention university chairs and departments, scientiﬁcjournals, prestigious research grants, libraries, databases, school curriculaand the like – have been designed to ﬁt the old structures and the oldquestions. Max Planck once remarked that new scientiﬁc truths don’treplace old ones by convincing established scientists that they were wrong;they do so because proponents of the older theory eventually die, andgenerations that follow ﬁnd the new truths and theories to be familiar,obvious even. We are optimists. We like to think it will not take that long.
In fact, we have already taken a ﬁrst step. We can see more clearly nowwhat is going on when, for example, a study that is rigorous in every otherrespect begins from the unexamined assumption that there was some‘original’ form of human society; that its nature was fundamentally good orevil; that a time before inequality and political awareness existed; thatsomething happened to change all this; that ‘civilization’ and ‘complexity’always come at the price of human freedoms; that participatory democracy is natural in small groups but cannot possibly scale up to anything like acity or a nation state.
We know, now, that we are in the presence of myths. 

Notes 
1. FAREWELL TO HUMANITY’S CHILDHOOD 
1. To take one example, Ian Morris’s (2015) Foragers, Farmers,and Fossil Fuels: How Human Values Evolve sets itself the ambitious challenge of ﬁnding a uniform measure of inequalityapplicable across the entire span of human history, by translatingthe ‘values’ of Ice Age hunter-gatherers and Neolithic farmersinto terms familiar to modern-day economists, and then usingthose to establish Gini coefﬁcients (i.e. formal inequality rates).It’s a laudable experiment, but one that quickly leads to somevery odd conclusions. For instance, in a 2015 piece for the New York Times, Morris estimated the income of a Palaeolithic hunter-gatherer at $1.10 a day, pegged to 1990 currency values. Wheredoes this ﬁgure come from? Presumably it has something to dowith the caloriﬁc value of daily food intake. But if we’recomparing this to daily incomes today, wouldn’t we also have tofactor in all the other things Palaeolithic foragers got for free, butwhich we ourselves would expect to pay for: free security, freedispute resolution, free primary education, free care of the elderly,free medicine, not to mention entertainment costs, music,storytelling and religious services? Even when it comes to food,we must consider quality: after all, we’re talking about 100 percent organic free-range produce here, washed down with purestnatural spring water. Much contemporary income goes tomortgages and rents. But consider the camping fees for primePalaeolithic locations along the Dordogne or the Vézère, not tomention the high-end evening classes in naturalistic rock-paintingand ivory-carving – and all those fur coats. Surely all this mustcost wildly in excess of $1.10 a day. As we’ll see in Chapter Four,it’s not for nothing that anthropologists sometimes refer toforagers as ‘the original afﬂuent society’. Such a life today wouldnot come cheap. Admittedly, this is all a bit silly, but that’s really 
our point: if one reduces world history to Gini coefﬁcients, sillythings will, necessarily, follow. 2. 
Fukuyama 2011: 43, 53–4. 3. Diamond 2012: 10–15. 4. Fukuyama 2011: 48. 5. Diamond 2012: 11. 
6. In the case of Fukuyama and Diamond one can, at least, note thatthey were never trained in the relevant disciplines (the ﬁrst is apolitical scientist, the other has a PhD on the physiology of thegall bladder). Still, even when anthropologists, archaeologists andhistorians try their hand at ‘big-picture’ narratives, they have anodd tendency to end up with some similarly minor variation onRousseau. Flannery and Marcus’s (2012) The Creation of Inequality: How our Prehistoric Ancestors Set the Stage forMonarchy, Slavery, and Empire, for example, offers all sorts ofinteresting insights into how inequality might emerge in humansocieties, but their overall framing of human history remainsexplicitly wedded to Rousseau’s second Discourse, concludingthat humanity’s best hope of a more egalitarian future is to ‘puthunters and gatherers in charge’. Walter Scheidel’s moreeconomically informed study, The Great Leveller: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-FirstCentury (2017), concludes – just as dismally – that there’s reallynothing we can do about inequality: civilization invariably puts incharge a small elite who grab more and more of the pie, and theonly thing that has ever been successful in dislodging them iscatastrophe in the form of war, plague, mass conscription,wholesale suffering and death. Half-measures never work. So ifyou don’t want to go back to living in a cave, or die in a nuclearholocaust (which presumably also ends up with the survivors incaves), you’re just going to have to accept the existence ofWarren Buffett and Bill Gates. 
7. Rousseau 1984 [1754]: 78. 
8. As articulated by Judith Shklar (1964), the renowned Harvardpolitical theorist. 
9. Rousseau 1984 [1754].: 122. 
10. As a matter of fact, Rousseau, unlike Hobbes, was not a fatalist.For Hobbes, all things large and small in history were to beunderstood as the unfolding of forces set in motion by God,which are ultimately beyond the capacity of humans to control(see Hunter 1989). Even a tailor making a garment is entering,from his ﬁrst stitch, into a ﬂow of historical entanglements that heis powerless to resist and of which he is largely unaware; hisprecise actions are tiny links in a great chain of causality that isthe very fabric of human history, and – in this rather extrememetaphysics of entanglement – to suggest that he might have beendoing these things some alternative way is to deny the whole,irreversible course of world history. For Rousseau, by contrast,what humans make, they could always unmake, or at least dodifferently. We could free ourselves from the chains that bind us;it just wasn’t going to be easy (see, again, Shklar 1964 for aclassic discussion of this aspect of Rousseau’s thought). 
11. 
Pinker 2012: 39, 43. 
12. If a trace of impatience can be detected in our presentation, thereason is this: so many contemporary authors seem to enjoyimagining themselves as modern-day counterparts to the greatsocial philosophers of the Enlightenment, men like Hobbes andRousseau, playing out the same grand dialogue but with a moreaccurate cast of characters. That dialogue in turn is drawn fromthe empirical ﬁndings of social scientists, includingarchaeologists and anthropologists like ourselves. Yet in fact thequality of their empirical generalizations is hardly better; in someways it’s probably worse. At some point, you have to take thetoys back from the children. 
13. Pinker 2012; 2018. 14. Pinker 2012: 42. 
15. Tilley 2015. 
16. Formicola 2007. 
17.
 Margaret Mead did this once, when she suggested that the ﬁrstsign of ‘civilization’ in human history was not tool use but a 

15,000-year-old skeleton that showed signs of having healed froma broken femur. It takes six weeks, she noted, to recover fromsuch an injury; most animals with broken femurs simply diebecause their companions abandon them; one of the things thatmakes humans so unusual is precisely that we take care of oneanother in such situations. 

18.
 Below, n.21. As others point out, Yanomami tend to sleeptogether six to even ten people in the same bed. This requires adegree of good-natured mutual accommodation of which fewcontemporary social theorists would be capable. If they werereally anything like the ‘ﬁerce savages’ of undergraduatecaricature, there would be no Yanomami as they’d all have longsince killed each other for snoring. 

19.
 In reality, far from being pristine exemplars of our ‘ancestralcondition’, the Yanomami in the 1960s to 1980s, when Chagnonconducted ﬁeldwork among them, had been exposed to decadesof European incursions, intensiﬁed by the discovery of gold ontheir lands. Over that period, Yanomami populations weredecimated by epidemics of infectious diseases introduced bymissionaries, prospectors, anthropologists and governmentagents; see Kopenawa and Albert 2013: 2–3. 


20. 
Chagnon 1988. 
21.
 Some were about the statistics Chagnon presented, and his claimthat men who achieved a state of ritual purity (unokai) obtainedmore wives and offspring than others. A key issue here, whichChagnon never entirely cleared up, is that unokai status was not reserved for men who had killed; it could also be achieved, forexample, by shooting an arrow into the corpse of an enemyalready slain, or indeed by causing death through non-physicalmeans, such as sorcery. Others pointed out that most unokai were on the older side of the age spectrum, and some held the status ofvillage headmen: both would have ensured more offspring, withno direct relationship to warfare. Still others pointed out a logicalﬂaw in Chagnon’s suggestion that homicide acted both asdeterrent to further killing (the unokai having earned a ﬁercereputation), and at the same time kept in motion a cycle of 

revenge killings on the part of embittered kinsmen: a kind of ‘warof all against all’. Criticisms of Chagnon: Albert 1989; Ferguson1989; and see Chagnon 1990 for a response. 

22.
 Geertz 2001. Academics are very prone to a phenomenon called‘schismogenesis’, which we will be exploring at various points inthis book. 

23.
 The framers of the US Constitution, for example, were quiteexplicitly anti-democratic and made clear in their own publicstatements that they designed the Federal Government in largepart to head off the risk of ‘democracy’ breaking out in one of theformer colonies (they were particularly worried aboutPennsylvania). Meanwhile, actual direct democratic decision-making had been practised regularly in various parts of Africa orAmazonia, or for that matter in Russian or French peasantassemblies, for thousands of years; see Graeber 2007b. 

24.
 For example, one would not have to waste one’s time coming upwith convoluted reasons why, say, forms of decision-making thatlook like democracy outside Europe are not ‘really’ democracy,philosophical arguments about nature that take rigorous logicalform are not ‘really’ science, etc. 

25.
 Chagnon (1998: 990) chose to end his famous Science paper withan anecdote to this very effect: ‘A particularly acute insight intothe power of law to thwart killing for revenge was provided to meby a young Yanomamö man in 1987. He had been taught Spanishby missionaries and sent to the territorial capital for training inpractical nursing. There he discovered police and laws. Heexcitedly told me that he had visited the town’s largest pata [theterritorial governor] and urged him to make law and policeavailable to his people so that they would not have to engage anylonger in their wars of revenge and have to live in constant fear.’ 


26. Pinker 2012: 54. 
27. 

As recounted by Valero to Ettore Biocca and published in 1965under the latter’s authorship. 

28.
 For which, see the evidence compiled in a (1977) thesis by J. N.Heard: ‘The Assimilation of Captives on the American Frontier in 

the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries’. 

29.
 In his (1782) Letters from an American Farmer J. Hector St John de Crèvecoeur noted how parents, at the end of a war, would visitIndian towns to reclaim their children: ‘To their inexpressiblesorrow, they found them so completely Indianized, that manyknew them no longer, and those whose more advanced agespermitted them to recollect their fathers and mothers, absolutelyrefused to follow them, and ran to their adopted parents forprotection against the effusions of love their unhappy real parentslavished upon them.’ (cited in Heard 1977: 55–6, who also notesCrèvecoeur’s conclusion that the Indians must possess a ‘socialbond singularly captivating, and far superior to anything to beboasted of among us’.) 


30. Franklin 1961 [1753]: 481–3. 
31.
 ‘Alas! Alas!’ wrote James Willard Schultz – an eighteen-year-oldfrom a prominent New York family who married into theBlackfoot, remaining with them until they were driven on to areservation – ‘Why could not this simple life have continued?Why must the … swarms of settlers have invaded that wonderfulland, and robbed its lords of all that made life worth living? Theyknew not care, nor hunger, nor want of any kind. From mywindow here, I hear the roar of the great city, and see the crowdshurrying by … “bound to the wheel” and there is no escape fromit except by death. And this is civilization! I, for one, maintainthat there is no … happiness in it. The Indians of the plains …alone knew what was perfect content and happiness, and that, weare told, is the chief end and aim of men – to be free from want,and worry, and care. Civilization will never furnish it, except tothe very, very few.’ (Schultz 1935: 46; see also Heard 1977: 42) 

32.
 See Heard 1977: 44, with references. 

33.
 For example, the Wendat (‘Huron’) societies of NortheasternNorth America in the seventeenth century – to which we turn inthe next chapter – of whom Trigger (1976: 62) notes that:‘Relations of friendship and material reciprocity were extendedbeyond the Huron confederacy in the form of tradingarrangements. In the historic period, trade was a source not only 

of luxury goods but of meat and skins which were vital to apopulation that had outstripped the resources of its nearby huntingterritory. Important as these goods were, however, foreign tradewas not merely an economic activity. It was embedded in anetwork of social relations that were, fundamentally, extensions of the friendly relationships that existed within the Huron confederacy.’ (Our emphasis.) For a general anthropologicalsurvey of ‘archaic trade’ the classic source remains Servet 1981;1982. Most contemporary archaeologists are well aware of thisliterature, but tend to get caught up in debates over the differencebetween ‘trade’ and ‘gift exchange’, while assuming that theultimate point of both is to enhance somebody’s status, either byproﬁt, or by prestige, or both. Most will also acknowledge thatthere is something inherently valuable, even cosmologicallysigniﬁcant, in the phenomenon of travel, the experience of remoteplaces or the acquisition of exotic materials; but in the last resort,much of this too seems to come down to questions of status orprestige, as if no other possible motivation might exist for peopleinteracting over long distances; for some further discussion of theissues see Wengrow 2010b. 

34.
 On ‘dream economies’ among the Iroquois see Graeber 2001:145–9. 

35.
 Following Charles Hudson’s (1976: 89–91) interpretation of


Cabeza de Vaca’s account. 36. DeBoer 2001. 
2. WICKED LIBERTY 
1.
 In his (2009) Europe Through Arab Eyes, 1578–1727, NabilMatar considers the relative lack of interest in Frankish Europeamong medieval Muslim writers, and possible reasons for it(especially, pp. 6–18). 

2.
 Many examples of this tendency are discussed in David AllenHarvey’s (2012) The French Enlightenment and its Others. 

3.
 A notorious example was that of Christian Wolff, the mostfamous German philosopher in the period between Leibniz and 

Kant – he too was a Sinophile and lectured on the superiority ofChinese modes of government, with the ultimate effect that anenvious colleague denounced him to the authorities, a warrantwas issued for his arrest and he was forced to ﬂee for his life. 

4.
 Some classic statements, especially concerning North America,are to be found in: Chinard 1913; Healy 1958; Berkhofer 1978a,1978b; Dickason 1984; McGregor 1988; Cro 1990; Pagden 1993;Sayre 1997; Franks 2002. 

5.
 For example, Grinde 1977; Johansen 1982, 1998; Sioui 1992;Levy 1996; Tooker 1988; 1990; and cf. Graeber 2007b. Theliterature, however, focuses around the impact of Native ideas onAmerican colonists, and has become bogged down in an argumentabout the speciﬁc ‘inﬂuence’ of the Haudenosaunee politicalconfederation on the American Constitution. The originalargument was actually much broader, suggesting that Europeansettlers in the Americas only came to think of themselves as‘Americans’ (rather than English or French or Dutch) when theybegan to adopt certain elements of Native American standardsand sensibilities, from the indulgent treatment of children toideals of republican self-governance. 

6. 

Alfani and Frigeni 2016. 

7.
 The best English-language source on these debates is Pagden1986. 

8.
 One of Rousseau’s rivals in the essay contest, the Marquisd’Argenson, who also failed to win a prize, made precisely thisargument: monarchy allowed the truest equality, he argued, andabsolutist monarchy most of all, since everyone is equal beforethe absolute power of the king. 

9.
 Lovejoy and Boas (1935) compile and provide commentary onall the relevant texts. 

10.
 As Barbara Alice Mann suggests to us (in personalcommunication), bourgeois women may have especiallyappreciated the Jesuit Relations because it allowed them to read about discussions of women’s sexual freedom in a form that was entirely acceptable to the Church. 

11.
 David Allen Harvey (2012: 75–6), for instance, placesLahontan’s Dialogues (to which we shortly turn) in a literaryclass with works by Diderot and Rousseau, writers who had littleif any direct experience of Native American peoples but invokedthem as a ‘discursively constructed Other with which tointerrogate European customs and civilization’. See also Pagden1983; 1993. 

12.
 It rarely seems to occur to anyone that (1) there are only so manylogical arguments one can make, and intelligent people in similarcircumstances will come up with similar rhetorical approaches,and (2) it is likely that European writers trained in the classicswould be especially impressed by arguments that reminded themof ones they already knew from Greek or Roman rhetoric.Obviously, such accounts do not provide a direct window on tothe original conversations, but to insist that they bear no relationat all seems equally absurd. 

13.
 Technically, the Huron were a confederation of Iroquoianspeakers that existed at the time the French arrived, but laterscattered under attacks from the Haudenosaunee to the south and then reformed as the Wyandot or Wendat, along with refugeesfrom the Petun and Neutral confederations. Their contemporarydescendants prefer Wendat (pronounced ‘Wen-dot’), noting that‘Huron’ was originally an insult, meaning (depending on thesource) either ‘pig-haired’ or ‘malodorous’. Sources at the timeregularly use ‘Huron’, and while we have followed BarbaraMann’s usage in changing it to ‘Wendat’ when quoting fromindigenous speakers like Kandiaronk, we have maintained it inEuropean sources. 

14.
 Biard 1611: 173 –4, cited in Ellingson 2001: 51. 

15.
 The Recollects were a branch of the Franciscan Order, who tookvows of poverty and were among the ﬁrst missionaries dispatchedto New France. 


16. Sagard 1939 [1632]: 192. 
17. Ibid.: 88–9. 
18.
 Wallace 1958; cf. also Graeber 2001, Chapter Five. 

19. 

The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents: Travels and Explorations of the Jesuit Missionaries in New France 1610–1791, ed. Reuben Gold Thwaites, and henceforth: JR 6: 109– 10/241. The phrase ‘captain’ is used indiscriminately in theFrench sources for any male in a position of authority, whetherthat person be a simple headman of a band or village, or theholder of an ofﬁcial rank in the Wendat or Haudenosaunee Confederation. 


20. 
JR 28: 47. 
21. 

JR 28: 48–9, cf. JR 10: 211–21. 

22. 

JR 28: 49–50. Here’s a different Jesuit father, returning to thedonkey theme again: ‘There is nothing so difﬁcult as to controlthe tribes of America. All these barbarians have the law of wild asses, – they are born, live, and die in a liberty without restraint;they do not know what is meant by bridle or bit. With them, toconquer one’s passions is considered a great joke, while to givefree rein to the senses is a lofty philosophy. The Law of our Lordis far removed from this dissoluteness; it gives us boundaries andprescribes limits, outside of which we cannot step withoutoffending God and reason.’ (JR 12:191–2). 


23. 
JR 5: 175. 24. 
JR 33: 49. 25. 
JR 28: 61–2. 
26. 

JR 15:155, also in Franks 2002: 4; cf. Blackburn 2000: 68. 

27.
 They were also unevenly accepted. Most Jesuits still subscribedto the old Renaissance doctrine that ‘savages’ had once been of ahigher level of grace and of civilization, and had degenerated(Blackburn 2000: 69). 

28.
 A comprehensive review of the literature by Ellingson (2001)ﬁnds the view that European observers regularly romanticizedthose they considered savages to be entirely unfounded; even themost positive accounts tended to be fairly nuanced, recognizingboth virtues and vices. 

29.
 So according to some sources at the time, and Wendat oraltraditions (Steckley 1981). 

30. 

The ofﬁcial histories claim that he converted at the very end ofhis life, and it’s true he was buried as a Christian in Notre-DameChurch in Montreal, but Mann argues convincingly that the storyof the deathbed conversion and burial is likely to have been amere political ploy on the part of the missionaries (Mann 2001:53). 

31.
 Chinard 1931; Allan 1966; Richter 1972; Betts 1984: 129–36;Ouellet 1990, 1995; White 1991; Basile 1997; Sayre 1997; Muthu2003: 25–9; Pinette 2006; but for a signiﬁcant exception see Hall2003: 160 ff. 

32.
 Sioui 1972, 1992, 1999; Steckley 1981, 2014: 56–62; Mann


2001. 33. Mann 2001: 55. 
34. Ibid.: 57–61. 
35.
 1704: 106–7. Cited references are to the 1735 English edition ofDialogues, but the translation in this instance is a combination ofthat, Mann’s (2001: 67–8), and our own. Subsequent translationsare our own, based on the 1735 edition. 

36.
 ‘Assuming he is so powerful and great, how likely is it that suchan unknowable being would have made himself into a man, dweltin misery, and died in infamy, just to work off the sin of someignoble creature who was as far beneath him as a ﬂy is beneaththe sun and the stars? Where does that leave his inﬁnite power?What good would it do him, and what use would he make of it?For my part, it seems to me that to believe in a debasement of thisnature is to doubt the unimaginable sweep of his omnipotence,while making extravagant presumptions about ourselves.’ (citedin Mann 2001: 66) 


37. Bateson 1935; 1936. 38. Sahlins 1999: 402, 414. 39. Allan 1966: 95. 
40.
 Ouellet 1995: 328. After a hiatus, another spate of similar playswith Indian heroes were produced in the 1760s: La Jeune Indienne (1764) by Chamfort and Le Huron (1768) byMarmontel. 

41.
 See Harvey (2012) for a good recent summary of the impact offoreign perspectives, real and imagined, on social thinking in theFrench Enlightenment. 

42.
 The expression is Pagden’s (1983). 

43.
 So, Etienne 1876; cf. Kavanagh 1994. In 1752, just around thetime de Grafﬁgny’s second edition appeared, a former soldier, spyand theatre director named Jean Henri Maubert de Gouvest also released a novel called Lettres Iroquois, the correspondence of animaginary Iroquois traveller named Igli, which was also hugelysuccessful. 

44. 

‘Without gold, it is impossible to acquire a part of this earthwhich nature has given in common to all men. Withoutpossessing what they call property, it is impossible to have gold,and by an inconsistency which is an outrage to natural commonsense, and which exasperates one’s reason, this haughty nation,following an empty code of honour entirely of its own invention,considers it a disgrace to receive from anyone other than thesovereign whatever is necessary to sustain one’s life andposition.’ (de Grafﬁgny 2009 [1747]: 58). 

45.
 Meek 1976: 70–71. Turgot was writing on the eve of theIndustrial Revolution. Later evolutionists would simply replace‘industrial’ with ‘commercial’. No pastoral society actuallyexisted in the New World, but somehow early evolutionists neverseemed to consider this a problem. 

46.
 It is to be noted that the question is framed in traditional terms:the arts and sciences are assumed not to progress, but rather stillto be in the process of being restored to their former (presumablyancient) glory. It was only over the course of the next decade thatnotions of progress became widely accepted. 

47.
 This is the third footnote of the Discourse on the Arts & Sciences, sometimes referred to as ‘The First Discourse’. 


Montaigne’s essay ‘On Cannibals’, written in 1580, appears to bethe ﬁrst to consider indigenous American perspectives onEuropean societies, with Tupinamba visitors questioning thearbitrariness of royal authority and wondering why the homelessdid not burn down the mansions of the rich. The fact that so manysocieties appeared to maintain peace and social order withoutcoercive institutions or even, it seemed, formal institutions ofgovernment of any kind caught the attention of Europeanobservers from very early on. Leibniz, for instance, who, aswe’ve seen, had long been promoting Chinese models ofbureaucracy as the embodiment of rational statecraft, felt this waswhat was really signiﬁcant in Lahontan’s testimony: thepossibility that statecraft might not be required at all (Ouellet1995: 323). 
48. Rousseau 1984 [1754]: 109. 
49.
 Rousseau described himself as an avid reader of travelogues anddoes cite Lebeau, who is basically summarizing Lahontan, as well as l’Arlequin sauvage (Allan 1966: 97–8; Muthu 2003: 12–13,25–8; Pagden 1983: 33). It’s extremely unlikely that Rousseauhad not read Lahontan in the original, though even if he hadn’t itwould just mean that he had come by the same arguments second.hand. 

50.
 Other examples: ‘The cultivation of the earth necessarily broughtabout its distribution; and property, once recognised, gave rise tothe ﬁrst rules of justice; for, to secure each man his own, it had tobe possible for each to have something. Besides, as men began tolook forward to the future, and all had something to lose, everyone had reason to apprehend that reprisals would follow anyinjury he might do to another.’ Compare that passage toKandiaronk’s argument, cited above, that the Wendat intentionallyavoided divisions of wealth because they had no desire to create acoercive legal system. Montesquieu made the same point indiscussing the Osage, noting that ‘the division of lands is whatprincipally increases the civil code. Among nations where theyhave not made this division there are very few civil laws’ – anobservation which seems to have been derived partly from 


Montesquieu’s conversation with members of an Osagedelegation that visited Paris in 1725 (Burns 2004: 362). 51. See Graeber 2011: 203–7. 
52.
 Rousseau himself had ﬂed home at an early age, writing to hisSwiss watchmaker father that he aspired to live ‘without the helpof others’. 

53.
 Barruel 1799: 104. The quote is from an anti-Illuminati tract,claiming to be the ‘Code of the Illuminati’, and this wholediscourse is so shrouded in rumour and accusation that we can’t even be entirely sure our sources didn’t just make it up; but in away it hardly matters, since the main point is that the right wingsaw Rousseauian ideas as inspiring leftist revolutionary activity. 

54.
 It is not entirely clear whether ‘Illuminism’ as it came to becalled was a revolutionary doctrine at all, since Weishaupt himselflater denied it – after the society was banned and he was himselfdriven from Bavaria – and characterized it as purely reformist;but his enemies of course insisted these protests weredisingenuous. 

55.
 The key difference is that Rousseau sees progress as underminingan essentially benevolent human nature, while classicconservative thought tends to see it as having underminedtraditional mores and forms of authority which had previouslybeen able to contain the less benevolent aspects of human nature. 

56.
 Certainly, there is a tendency, in all this literature, whenintroduced to unfamiliar societies, to treat them alternately asentirely good or entirely evil. Columbus was already doing this inthe 1490s. All we’re saying here is that this does not mean thatnothing they ever said had any bearing on the actual perspectivesof those they encountered. 

57.
 Chinard 1913: 186, translation following Ellingson 2001: 383. Asimilar passage: ‘Rebel against all constraints, all laws, allhierarchies, the baron Lahontan and his American savage areanarchists properly speaking. The Dialogues with a Savage are neither a political treatise nor a learned dissertation, they are theclarion call of a revolutionary journalist; Lahontan opens the way 


not just for Jean-Jacques Rousseau, but for Father Duchesne andthe modern socialist revolutionaries, and all that just ten yearsbefore the death of Louis XIV.’ (1913: 185, translation ours). 
58. 
Ellingson 2001: 383. 
59. The construction ‘our own’ of course presumes that Native
Americans don’t read books, or those that do don’t matter. 60. Chinard 1913: 214. 
61.
 ‘His imagination paints no pictures; his heart makes no demandson him. His few wants are so readily supplied, and he is so farfrom having the knowledge which is needful to make him wantmore, that he can have neither foresight nor curiosity … His soul,which nothing disturbs, is wholly wrapped up in the feeling of itspresent existence, without any idea of the future, however near athand; while his projects, as limited as his views, hardly extend tothe close of day. Such, even at present, is the extent of the nativeCaribbean’s foresight: he will improvidently sell you his cotton-bed in the morning, and come crying in the evening to buy itagain, not having foreseen he would want it again the next night.’(Rousseau 1984 [1754]: 90). 

62.
 ‘Fraternity’ might seem the odd man out here, at least insofar asNative American inﬂuences go – though a case can be made thatit echoes the responsibility for mutual aid and support whichAmerican observers so often remarked on. Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws makes a great point of the sense of fraternalcommitment among the Osage, and his book was a powerfulinﬂuence on the political theorists of both the American andFrench Revolutions; as we’ll see in Chapter Eleven, Montesquieuhimself appears to have met with an Osage delegation visitingParis and his observations may be based on direct communicationwith them (Burns 2004: 38, 362). 

63.
 In the sense that women controlled land and its produce and alsomost other productive resources, but men controlled most of theimportant political ofﬁces. 


3. UNFREEZING THE ICE AGE 
1.
 The authoritative account, well into the nineteenth century, wasthat of James Ussher, Archbishop of Armagh, ﬁrst published in1650, though it is important to note that none other than Sir IsaacNewton proposed an alternative calculation, suggesting the actualdate was 3988 BC. 

2. 

The phrase we owe to Thomas Trautmann’s (1992) account ofthis ‘time revolution’. While the ﬁeld of anthropology came intoexistence during the ‘decade of Darwin’ (i.e. between thepublication of The Origin of Species in 1859 and The Descent of Man in 1871), it was not actually Darwinism but archaeologicalexcavations that established the timescale of human prehistory aswe know it. Geology paved the way, replacing the biblicallyinspired view of earth’s genesis as a series of rapid titanicupheavals with a more mechanistic and gradual account of ourplanet’s origins. More detailed studies of the early developmentof scientiﬁc prehistory, and how fossil evidence and stone toolswere ﬁrst ﬁtted into this expanded chronology of life on earth, canbe found in Schnapp 1993 and Trigger 2006. 

3.
 The key ﬁndings are summarized in Scerri et al. 2018. For anaccessible account see also Scerri’s feature article in New Scientist, published online (25 April 2018) as ‘Origin of ourspecies: why humans were once so much more diverse’. 

4.
 The Sahara seems to have acted as a kind of turnstile for human evolution, periodically turning green and then dry again with thecyclical advance/retreat of monsoon rains, opening and shuttingthe gates of interaction between northern and southern parts of theAfrican continent (see Scerri 2017). 

5.
 Geneticists assume, reasonably enough, that a fair amount ofgenetic admixture did take place. 

6.
 Green et al. 2010; Reich et al. 2010. Fossil evidence tells us thatthe ﬁrst expansions of modern humans out of Africa began as farback as 210,000 years ago (Harvati et al. 2019), but these wereoften tentative and quite short-lived, at least until the moredecisive radiations of our species began around 60,000 BC. 

7.
 Recent and historical hunter-gatherers, as we shall see, present anenormous range of possibilities, from assertively egalitarian 


groups like the Ju/ ’hoansi of the Kalahari, the Mbendjele BaYakaof Congo or the Agta in the Philippines to assertively hierarchicalones like the populations of the Canadian Northwest Coast, theCalusa of Florida Keys or the forest-dwelling Guaicurú ofParaguay (these latter groups, far from being egalitarian, areknown to have traditionally kept slaves and lived in rankedsocieties). Holding up any particular subset of recent foragers asrepresentatives of ‘early human society’ is essentially a matter ofpicking cherries. 
8. Hrdy 2009. 
9.
 Will, Conard and Tryon 2019, with further references. 

10.
 For important reviews and critiques of the ‘Human Revolution’idea see McBrearty and Brooks 2000; Mellars et al. 2007. 

11. 

The term ‘Venus ﬁgurine’ is still widely used, but has links toscientiﬁc racism in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,when direct comparisons were drawn between prehistoric imagesand the anatomy of modern individuals considered livingspecimens of humanity in its ‘primitive’ forms. A tragic exampleis the life story of Sara Baartman, a Khoikhoi woman who wasexhibited around Europe as a ‘freak’ owing to her large buttocksunder the stage name ‘Hottentot Venus’. See Cook 2015. 


12. Renfrew 2007. 
13.
 The case against European exceptionalism was laid out by SallyMcBrearty and Alison Brooks in a key (2000) publication; andhas since been supplemented by discoveries in South Asia (Jamesand Petraglia 2005) and Africa (Deino et al. 2018). 

14.
 Shipton et al. 2018. 

15.
 Aubert et al. 2018. 

16.
 Conceivably this included the making of cave art; Hoffmann etal. 2018. 

17.
 Recent efforts to estimate the overall human population at thestart of the Upper Palaeolithic (known as the Aurignacian period)suggest a mean ﬁgure of just 1,500 people for the whole of 

western and central Europe, which is remarkably low; Schmidtand Zimmermann 2019. 

18.
 For the relationship between demographic density and enhancedcultural transmission in Upper Palaeolithic Europe see the (2009)arguments of Powell, Shennan and Thomas. 

19.
 This is obviously only a last resort and usually extreme measuresare employed to ensure it’s really called for: in rural Madagascar,for instance, when police were effectively absent, the usual rulewas that one could only lynch such a person if his parents gavepermission ﬁrst – which was usually effective as a way to simplydrive the person out of town. (D. Graeber, ﬁeld observation.) 


20. Boehm 1999: 3–4. 
21.
 Initially, but as it turns out wrongly thought to be a boy and girl;for new genetic evidence on this point see Sikora et al. 2017. 

22.
 Again, modern genetic studies of the group burial at DolníV.stonice have conﬁrmed the male identity of all three burials,which was previously in doubt; Mittnik 2016. 

23.
 Evidence from these various sites is usefully summarized andevaluated in Pettitt 2011, with further references; and see alsoWengrow and Graeber 2015. 

24.
 See e.g. White 1999; Vanhaeren and D’Errico 2005. Inheritanceis hardly the only possible explanation for the association ofwealth with children: in many societies where wealth circulatesfreely (for instance, where it’s socially impossible to refuse arequest to hand over one’s necklace or bracelet to an admirer), alot of ornament ends up festooning children to keep it out ofcirculation. If elaborate ornaments were buried in part to takethem out of circulation, so as not to create invidious distinctions,burying them with children might be the ideal way to accomplishthis. 

25.
 Schmidt 2006; and for a convenient digest see alsohttps://www.dainst.blog/the-tepe-telegrams/ 


26.
 As ventured by Haklay and Gopher 2020, based on geometricalregularities and correspondences found among the ground plansof some three large enclosures; but doubts remain, as their study 

does not take into account the complex and dynamic constructionsequences that lie behind the enclosures, and compares buildingphases that are not strictly contemporaneous. 

27.
 Acemo.lu and Robinson 2009: 679; and see also Dietrich et al.2019; Flannery and Marcus 2012: 128–31. 

28.
 For the monumental character of mammoth structures in their Ice Age settings see Soffer 1985; Iakovleva 2015: 325, 333. As wenote below, current research by Mikhail Sablin, Natasha Reynoldsand colleagues shows that the term ‘mammoth houses’ or‘dwellings’ may well be misleading in some cases; in fact, theprecise functions of these impressive structures may have variedconsiderably across regions and periods (see also Pryor et al.2020). For the massive wooden enclosures as evidence of large,seasonal gatherings see Zheltova 2015. 

29.
 Sablin, Reynolds, Iltsevich and Germonpré (manuscript inpreparation; made available to us by courtesy of NatashaReynolds). 

30.
 Ibid. 

31.
 In fact, even small children are typically far more imaginativethan this, and as we all know spend a considerable part of theirtime constructing alternative roles and symbolic worlds to inhabit.Robert L. Kelly, in his magisterial survey of the ‘foragingspectrum’, offered a clear statement of the problem concerningthe stereotyping of forager populations, urging a study of ‘hunter.gatherer prehistory in terms other than broad typological contrastssuch as generalized versus specialized, simple versus complex,storing versus non-storing, or immediate versus delayed return’(2013: 274). Still, we note that in the main part of his study Kellyhimself maintains just such a broad dichotomy between‘egalitarian’ and ‘non-egalitarian’ hunter-gatherers as distincttypes of society with supposedly ﬁxed internal characteristics(tabulated as a binary contrast between ‘simple versus complex’forms; Kelly 2013: 242, table 9-1). 

32. 

The British historian Keith Thomas, for instance, compiled awhole list of casual rejections of Christianity from medieval andRenaissance English sources. ‘The Bishop of Exeter complained 

in 1600 that in his diocese it was “a matter very common todispute whether there be a God or not” … In Essex a husband.man of Bradwell-near-the-Sea was said to “hold his opinion thatall things cometh by nature, and does afﬁrm this as an atheist” …At Wing, Rutland, in 1633 Richard Sharpe was accused of saying“there is no God and that he hath no soul to save”. From Durham in 1635 came the case of Brian Walker who, when asked if he didnot fear God, retorted that, “I do not believe there is either God orDevil; neither will I believe anything but what I see”: as analternative to the Bible he commended “the book called Chaucer”’ (1978: 202). The difference of course is that whileexpressing such opinions among the Winnebago might make youa ﬁgure of fun, under the government of Queen Elizabeth or KingJames it could get you into serious trouble – as evidenced by thefact that we know most of these people because of trialdocuments. 

33.
 Beidelman 1971: 391–2. The account assumes that prophets aremale but there are documented cases of female prophets as well.Douglas Johnson (1997) provides the deﬁnitive history of Nuerprophets in the early twentieth century. 


34. Lévi-Strauss 1967 [1944]: 61. 
35.
 Lee and Devore 1968: 11. It’s worth noting, perhaps, that Lévi-Strauss offered a forlorn epilogue to Man the Hunter, which is notread any more. 

36.
 Formicola (2007) surveys the evidence; and see also Trinkaus2018; Trinkaus and Buzhilova 2018. 

37.
 This is the general pattern (Pettitt 2011). Of course, it is notcompletely universal – the Romito dwarf, for example, does notseem to have been buried with grave goods. 

38.
 Archaeologists have observed close spatial associations betweenlarge Upper Palaeolithic (Magdalenian) aggregation sites in theFrench Périgord and natural choke points or ‘bottlenecks’ alongthe Dordogne and Vézère such as fords or meanders: ideallocations for intercepting herds of reindeer on their seasonalmigrations (White 1985). In northern Spain, the famous cave sitesof Altamira and Castillo have long been identiﬁed as aggregation 

locales based on their topographical location and thepreponderance of seasonal resources like deer, ibex and shellﬁshamong the animal remains found there (Straus 1977). On theperiglacial ‘mammoth steppe’ of Central Russia, spectacularlylarge settlements like Mezhirich and Mezin – with theirmammoth-bone dwellings, ﬁxed storage pits and abundantevidence of art and trade – were aligned on major river systems(Dnepr and Desna), which also channelled the annual north–southmovements of steppe bison, horse, reindeer and mammoth (Soffer1985). Similarly, the Pavlov Hills of southern Moravia, whereDolní V.stonice is located, once formed part of a narrow belt offorest-steppe, bridging the non-glaciated zones of eastern andwestern Europe (see contributions by Ji.í Svoboda, in Roebroekset al. 2000). Year-round habitation was certainly possible in someof these locations, but population densities are still likely to haveﬂuctuated markedly between seasons. Recently, archaeologistshave begun using more ﬁne-grained analytical techniques – likethe microscopic study of growth patterns in animal teeth andantlers, as well as measuring geochemical proxies of seasonalvariation such as stable isotope ratios in animal remains – todetermine the migration patterns and diets of hunted game (for auseful survey see Prendergast et al. 2018). 

39.
 Lang et al. 2013; L. Dietrich et al. 2019 (grinding slabs, stonebowls, hand pounders, pestles and mortars are all found inimpressive numbers at Göbekli Tepe); and see also O. Dietrich etal. 2012. 

40.
 Parker Pearson (2012) provides a detailed survey andinterpretation of the archaeology of Stonehenge, including theresults of recent ﬁeldwork. The argument for Neolithicaristocracy is based on close analysis and dating of humanremains associated with different phases in the construction ofStonehenge, which prove consistent with the idea that the ﬁrststone circle was linked to a high-status cemetery, where thecremated remains of a nuclear family were placed around the startof the third millennium BC. Subsequent removals and rebuildings,including the incorporation of massive sarsen stones, wereapparently linked to ongoing mortuary rituals, as the same 

family’s lineage presumably expanded in size and status over aperiod of centuries. 

41.
 For the rejection of cereal-farming in prehistoric Britain duringperiods of megalithic construction see Stevens and Fuller 2012;for the seasonality of midwinter meat-feasting at DurringtonWalls, as detected from tooth remains, see Wright et al. 2014. 

42.
 Viner et al. 2010; Madgwick et al. 2019. 

43.
 Of course, humans are not alone in this. Non-human primates,like chimpanzees and bonobos, also vary the size and structure oftheir groups on a seasonal basis according to the changingdistribution of edible resources in what primatologists call‘ﬁssion-fusion’ systems (Dunbar 1988). So too, in fact, do allsorts of other gregarious animals. But what Mauss was talkingabout and what we’re considering here is categorically differentfrom this. Uniquely, for humans such alternations also involvecorresponding changes in moral, legal and ritual organization. Notjust strategic alliances, but entire systems of roles and institutionsare liable to be periodically disassembled and reconstructed,allowing for more or less concentrated ways of living at differenttimes of year. 

44. 

Mauss and Beuchat 1979 [1904–5]. It’s worth noting that politicswasn’t the aspect of seasonal variations they themselves chose toemphasize, being more concerned with the contrast betweensecular and ceremonial arrangements and the effects this had onthe self-consciousness of the group. E.g. ‘Winter is a season whenEskimo society is highly concentrated and in a state of continualexcitement and hyperactivity. Because individuals are broughtinto close contact with one another, their social interactionsbecome more frequent, more continuous and coherent; ideas areexchanged; feelings are mutually revived and reinforced. By itsexistence and constant activity, the group becomes more aware ofitself and assumes a more prominent place in the consciousness ofindividuals.’ (p. 76) 

45.
 It’s surely no coincidence that so much of Kwakiutl art playsvisually on the relation of ‘name,’ ‘person’ and ‘role’ – relations 


laid open to scrutiny by their seasonal practices (Lévi-Strauss1982). 46. Lowie 1948: 18. 
47.
 ‘One does not ﬁnd in these Plains military societies the germs oflaw and of the state. One ﬁnds that the germs have germinatedand grown up. They are comparable, not antecedent, to ourmodern state and what would appear to be the important problemfor study is not the investigation of how one grew out of the other,but what they have in common which might throw light on thenature of law and of the state.’ (Provinse 1937: 365) 

48.
 Much of the rest of Lowie’s essay focuses on the role of chiefs,arguing that the power of political leaders over the ‘anarchic’societies of the Americas was so carefully circumscribed as toexclude the emergence of permanent structures of coercion.Insofar as indigenous states developed there, he concluded, itcould only have been through the power of prophecy: the promiseof a better world, with religious ﬁgures claiming authoritydirectly from the gods. A generation later, Pierre Clastres madealmost exactly the same argument in his 1974 essay, SocietyAgainst the State. He follows Lowie so closely that he can onlyhave been directly inspired. While Lowie is now largelyforgotten, Clastres is remembered for arguing that statelesssocieties do not represent an evolutionary stage, innocent ofhigher organization, but are based on the self-conscious andprincipled rejection of coercive authority. Interestingly, the oneelement not carried over from Lowie to Clastres is that of seasonal variations in modes of authority; and this is despite thefact that Clastres himself focused largely on Amazonian societies,which did in fact have very different structures at different timesof year (see Maybury-Lewis ed. 1979). A common and logicalobjection to Clastres’s argument, which remains hugelyinﬂuential, is to ask how Amazonian societies could haveconsciously organized themselves against the emergence of formsof authority they’d never actually experienced. It seems to us thatbringing seasonal variations back into the debate goes asigniﬁcant way to resolving this dilemma. 

49.
 Seasonal kings or lords like ‘John Barleycorn’ – a variant of thesacred ruler, destined to end his tenure and be killed each year atharvest time – are stock ﬁgures of British folklore to this day, butthere is little agreement on how much further back they gobeyond their earliest written mentions in the sixteenth century AD. The ubiquity of such ‘temporary kings’ in European, African,Indian, and Greco-Roman myth and legend was the subject ofBook III in James Frazer’s The Golden Bough, which he called‘The Dying God’. 

50.
 Perhaps one reason why the published paper (Lowie 1948) hasbeen forgotten is because of the distinctly uninspiring title: ‘Someaspects of political organisation among the AmericanAborigines’. 


51. Knight 1991. 
52.
 Discussed further by D. Graeber in ‘Notes on the politics ofdivine kingship: Or, elements for an archaeology of sovereignty’,in Graeber and Sahlins 2017, Chapter Seven. 

53.
 On the ‘carnivalesque’ the classic text is Bakhtin’s Rabelais and His World (1940). 

54.
 This is hardly the place to go into detail about the history of thesedebates, but it’s interesting to observe that they emerge directlyfrom Mauss’s research on seasonality, which he carried out in co.ordination with his uncle, Émile Durkheim, who is considered thefounder of French sociology in the same sense that Mauss is ofFrench anthropology. In 1912, in The Elementary Forms ofReligious Life, Durkheim relied upon Mauss’s research onindigenous Australian societies to contrast what they described asthe ordinary economic existence of Australian bands – concernedmostly with getting food – with the ‘effervescence’ of theirseasonal gatherings, called corroboree. It was in the excitement of corroboree, he argued, that the power to create society appearedto them, as if it were an alien force projected into totemic spiritsand their emblems. This was the ﬁrst formulation of the basic problematic that almost all theorists have been forced to grapplewith ever since: that rituals are simultaneously moments wheresocial structure is manifested and moments of ‘anti-structure’ in 

which new social forms can pop up. British social anthropology,which took its initial theoretical inspiration primarily fromDurkheim, worked through the problem in various ways (notablythe work of Edmund Leach, Victor Turner or Mary Douglas). Themost sophisticated, and to our minds compelling, proposals forhow to resolve the dilemma are currently Maurice Bloch’s (2008)notion of the ‘transcendental’ versus ‘transactional’ realms; andSeligman et al.’s (2008) argument that ritual creates a‘subjunctive’ or ‘as if’ domain of order, consciously set apartfrom a reality that is always seen in a contrasting light, asfragmented and chaotic. Ritual creates a world which is markedoff as standing apart from ordinary life, but is also whereessentially imaginary, ongoing institutions (like clans, empires,etc.) exist and are maintained. 

55. 

As Peter Burke (2009: 283–5) notes, the idea that rituals ofrebellion were simply ‘safety valves’ or ways of allowingcommon folk to ‘let off steam’ is ﬁrst documented only two yearsafter the invention of the steam engine – the favoured metaphorbefore that had been to let off the pressure in a wine cask. At thesame time, though, medieval authorities were keenly aware of thefact that most peasant revolts or urban insurrections would beginprecisely during such ritual moments. This ambivalence appearsagain and again. Rousseau already considered the popular festivalto embody the spirit of revolution. Such ideas were laterdeveloped in Roger Caillois’s seminal essay on ‘the festival’,written for George Bataille’s Collège de Sociologie (transl. 2001[1939]). It went through two drafts, the ﬁrst holding forth thefestival as a model of revolutionary social liberation, the secondholding it forth as a harbinger of fascism. 


4. FREE PEOPLE, THE ORIGIN OF CULTURES, AND THEADVENT OF PRIVATE PROPERTY 
1.
 Or at least broadly similar in form and function: specialists inprehistoric stone tool analysis, of course, spend a great deal oftime differentiating speciﬁc ‘industries’ on the basis of ﬁne-grained analysis, but even those who ﬁnd themselves more 

‘splitters’ than ‘lumpers’ would not deny the broad similarities ofUpper Palaeolithic traditions – the Aurignacian, Gravettian,Solutrean, Magdalenian, Hamburgian and so on – over veryimpressive geographical spans. For some recent discussion of theissues see Reynolds and Riede 2019. 

2.
 Schmidt and Zimmerman 2019. 

3. 

Bird et al. 2019; see also Hill et al. 2011. 

4.
 This was one reason for the North Americans’ famous development of sign language. It is interesting that in either case,one is dealing with systems of totemic clans: raising the questionof whether such systems are themselves typically forms of long-distance organization (cf. Tooker 1971). If nothing else, thecommon stereotype that ‘primitive’ peoples saw anyone outsidetheir particular local group only as enemies appears to be entirelygroundless. 

5.
 Jordan et al. 2016; also Clarke 1978; Sherratt 2004. 

6.
 We’ll see examples in the next chapter. 

7.
 One can agree, for instance, with the arguments of James C.Scott (2017), that an afﬁnity exists between grain economies andthe interests of predatory elites imposing their authority throughtaxation, raiding and tribute (grain being an eminently visible,quantiﬁable, appropriable and storable resource). Nowhere,however, does Scott make the naive claim that taking up cereal-farming will in every case produce a state: he simply points outthat, for these very pragmatic reasons, a majority of successfulstates and empires have chosen to promote – and often enforce –the production of a small number of grain crops among theirsubject populations, while similarly discouraging the pursuit ofmore chaotic, ﬂuid and thus unmanageable forms of subsistence,such as nomadic pastoralism, garden cultivation or seasonalhunting and gathering. We will return to these issues in laterchapters. 

8.
 For basic texts: Woodburn 1982, 1988, 2005. 

9.
 Leacock 1978; for a more extended argument, Gardner 1991. 

10. 

JR 33: 49. When Lallemant says the Wendat had never knownwhat it means to forbid something he presumably means byhuman law: they were, no doubt, familiar with ritual prohibitionsof one sort or another. 

11.
 By this we mean that their power was largely theatrical – thoughof course they also played a critical advisory role. 

12.
 The way we are using the term here somewhat echoes AmartyaSen (2001) and Martha Nussbaum’s (2011) ‘CapabilityApproach’ to social welfare, which also speaks of ‘substantivefreedoms’ as the ability to take part in economic or politicalactivity, live to old age etc.; but we actually arrived at the termindependently. 

13.
 Gough 1971; see also Sharon Hutchinson 1996 for the fullimplications for women’s autonomy, taking matters down to post-colonial times. 


14. Evans-Pritchard 1940: 182. 
15.
 It is intriguing to note, in this regard, that all human languageshave an imperative form; there are no people, even in radicallyanti-authoritarian societies like the Hadza, who are entirelyunfamiliar with the idea of a command. Yet at the same time,many societies clearly arrange things in such a way that no onecan give another person orders systematically. 

16.
 It must be recalled in this context that Turgot was writing in themid eighteenth century, so most of the criteria we use nowadaysto justify the superiority of ‘Western civilization’ (a concept thatdid not exist at the time) clearly would not apply: Europeanstandards of hygiene and public health, for example, wereappalling, much worse than prevailed among ‘primitive’ peoplesof the time; Europe had no democratic institutions to appeal to, itslegal systems were barbaric by world standards (e.g. Europeanswere still imprisoning heretics and burning witches, somethingwhich happened almost nowhere else); standards of living andeven de facto wage levels were lower than in India, or China, orunder the Ottoman Empire or Safavid Persia until perhaps the1830s. 

17.
 The proposal that medieval European peasants worked fewerhours overall than contemporary American ofﬁce workers wasﬁrst, famously, made by the American sociologist Juliet Schor inThe Overworked American (1991). It has been contested butappears to have stood the test of time. 

18.
 It was based, in fact, on his own brief contribution to the Man the Hunter symposium two years before. The original essay has beenreprinted in various editions of Sahlins’s collected essays underthe overall title Stone Age Economics (most recently, Sahlins 2017). 

19.
 The key studies relied on by Sahlins are gathered in Lee andDevore 1968. Earlier ethnographic work, by contrast, was hardlyever supported by statistical data. 


20. Braidwood 1957: 22. 
21.
 The concept of a Neolithic Revolution, now more often calledthe Agricultural Revolution, was introduced by the Australianprehistorian V. Gordon Childe in the 1930s, who identiﬁed theorigins of farming as the ﬁrst of three major revolutions in humancivilization, the second being the Urban Revolution and the thirdthe Industrial. See Childe 1936. 

22.
 As we’ve seen in Chapter One, people do in fact still make thiskind of claim quite routinely, but they do so in ﬂagrant disregardof the evidence presented by Sahlins, Lee, Devore, Turnbull andmany others, almost as if none of this research had ever beenpublished. 

23.
 This reading of Augustine is actually derived from Sahlins’s ownlater work (1996, 2008). At the time, of course, all this could onlybe informed speculation. Now new discoveries about the evolvingrelationship between people and crops are forcing us to revisit histhesis, as we’ll see in Chapters Six and Seven. 


24. 
Sahlins 2017 [1968]: 36–7. 
25. Codere 1950:19. 
26.
 Oddly enough, Poverty Point is actually situated almost exactlymidway between the Bayou Macon Wildlife Management Areaand the Black Bear Golf Club. 

27.
 We quote here from Kidder’s (2018) summary article. For a moreextended, if somewhat idiosyncratic, account of Poverty Pointarchaeology see Gibson 2000; and for a wide-ranging assessment,Sassaman 2005. 

28.
 As Lowie (1928) demonstrated, in more recent Amerindiansocieties it was usually ownership of these ‘incorporeal’ goods(which he compared to our patents and copyrights) that unlockedrights of usufruct over land and resources, rather than directownership of territory. 


29. Clark 2004. 
30.
 Gibson and Carr 2004: 7, here citing Sahlins’s ‘original afﬂuentsociety’ on the matter of ‘simple, ordinary foragers’. 

31.
 For which see also Sassaman 2005: 341–5; 2010: 56 ff.;Sassaman and Heckenberger 2004. 

32.
 A special issue of the Society for American Archaeology’smagazine contains useful discussion of ‘Archaic’ shell-moundcultures in various parts of North America; see Sassaman (ed.)2008. For evidence of prehistoric coastal fortiﬁcations, trade andwarfare in British Columbia see Angelbeck and Grier 2012;Ritchie et al. 2016. 

33.
 Sannai Maruyama, the largest and most impressive J.mon site,was occupied between 3900 and 2300 BC, and lies in the AomoriPrefecture in northern Japan. Habu and Fawcett (2008) provide alively account of the site’s discovery, reception and contemporaryinterpretation. For broader discussions of J.mon material culture,settlement patterns and uses of the environment see Takahashiand Hosoya 2003; Habu 2004; Kobayashi 2004; Matsui andKanehara 2006; Crema 2013. It’s worth noting that the ancientJ.mon have been inﬁltrating modern consciousness in other waystoo: the distinctive ‘rope pattern’ aesthetics of their highly craftedceramics provided the graphic template for one of Nintendo’smost popular video games, The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. J.mon seems quite at home in the digital age. 

34.
 In Europe, the term ‘Mesolithic’ refers to the history of ﬁsher.hunter-gatherers after the Ice Age, including their ﬁrst encounters 

with farming populations, which we’ll discuss in Chapter Seven. Some consider the Finnish ‘Giant’s Churches’ to have had a defensive function (Sipilä and Lahelma 2006), while others notetheir astronomical alignments and possible role in signifying thedivision of the year into four seasons, as per the much latermedieval Nordic calendar. For the dating and analysis of the so-called Shigir Idol see Zhilin et al. 2018. And for Mesolithic burialtraditions in Karelia and Europe’s Atlantic seaboard see Jacobs1995; Schulting 1996. 

35.
 Sassaman (ed.) 2008. 

36.
 English edition of Lahontan (1735), p. 113. 

37.
 Tully 1994. Locke’s position was repudiated by Chief JusticeMarshall in 1823, in the case Johnson and Grahame’s Lesee v. McIntosh. But in some countries the related principle of terra nullius (‘land belonging to no one’) was revoked only much morerecently, in Australia as recently as the 1992 ‘Mabo Decision’,which ruled that Aboriginal and Torres Strait islanders did afterall have their own distinct forms of land tenure before British colonization. 

38.
 This is the argument of Dark Emu by Bruce Pascoe (2014);whether or not one accepts this technical deﬁnition of farming,the strength of the evidence he presents is overwhelming, to showthat indigenous populations were routinely working, cultivatingand enhancing their territories, and had been for millennia. 

39.
 Of course, the existence of past inequalities and exploitationdoesn’t in any way weaken claims to title by indigenous groups,unless one wants to argue that only groups living in someimaginary State of Nature are worthy of legal compensation. 


40. Marquardt 1987: 98. 
41. Frank Cushing, of the Bureau of American Ethnology, wasamong the ﬁrst to embark on a systematic study of the remains ofCalusa society, which dwindled into obsolescence in theseventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Cushing, even with therudimentary archaeological methods of his time, reachedconclusions that have been borne out by later research: ‘The development of the Key Dwellers in this direction, is attested byevery Key ruin – little or great – built so long ago, yet enduringthe storms that have since played havoc with the mainland; ismutely yet even more eloquently attested by every great group ofthe shell mounds on these Keys built for the chief’s houses andtemples; by every lengthy canal built from materials of slow andlaborious accumulation from the depths of the sea. Therefore, tomy mind, there can be no question that the executive, rather thanthe social side of government was developed among these ancientKey Dwellers to an almost disproportionate degree; to a degreewhich led not only to the establishment among them of totemicpriests and headmen, as among the Pueblos, but to more than this
– to the development of a favoured class, and of chieftains even incivil life little short of regal in power and tenure of ofﬁce.’(Cushing 1896: 413; and for more recent accounts see Widmer1988; Santos-Granero 2009). 
42. 
For a summary of the evidence on Calusa subsistence and its
socio-economic implications see Widmer 1988: 261–76. 43. Flew 1989. 
44. Trouillot 2003. 
45. Consider the reaction of Otto von Kotzebue, commander of aRussian ship called the Rurik, on ﬁrst catching sight of theSacramento River in November 1824: ‘The many rivers ﬂowingthrough this fruitful country will be of greatest use to futuresettlers. The low ground is exactly adapted to the cultivation ofrice; and the higher, from the extraordinary strength of the soil,would yield the ﬁnest wheat-harvests. The vine might becultivated here to great advantage. All along the banks of the rivergrapes grow wild, in as much profusion as the rankest weeds: theclusters were large; and the grapes, though small, very sweet, andagreeably ﬂavoured. We often ate them in considerable quantities,and sustained no inconvenience from them. The Indians also ate them voraciously.’ Cited in Lightfoot and Parrish 2009: 59. 
46. Nabokov 1996: 1. 
47.
 In Florida we ﬁnd stone tools together with mastodon bones atleast 14,000 years old (Halligan et al. 2016). Evidence for early 

coastal penetration into the Americas along the so-called ‘kelphighway’ is presented by Erlandson et al. 2007. 

48.
 In a now classic discussion, Bailey and Milner (2002) laid out apowerful case for the central role of coastal hunter-gatherers inthe evolution of human societies, between the Late Pleistoceneand the Mid-Holocene, noting how changing sea levels havegrossly distorted our conventional picture of early humandemography, submerging a greater part of the evidence. TheTågerup promontory in western Scania, Sweden – and the widerregion of southern Scandinavia – offer excellent examples oflarge scale and longevity in Mesolithic settlement, and for everysuch ancient coastal landscape that survives we must surelyimagine hundreds more, long hidden below the waves (Larsson1990; Karsten and Knarrström 2013). 

49.
 For a more detailed analysis of the Natchez divine kingship seeGraeber and Sahlins 2017: 390–95. We only know that the GreatSun’s power was so limited because when the French and Englishwere competing for allies they found that each Natchez villageadopted its own, often contradictory, foreign policy, regardless ofwhat the Great Sun told them to do. If the Spanish had limitedtheir dealings to the court, they might well have missed outentirely on this side of things. 

50.
 Woodburn 2005: 26 (our emphasis). Nor, we should add, is itdifﬁcult to ﬁnd other examples of free societies (for instance, inaboriginal California or Tierra del Fuego), where no adult wouldever presume to give another a direct order, but where the oneexception is during ritual masquerades when gods, spirits andancestors who impose laws and punish infractions are presumedto be, somehow, present; see also Loeb 1927; also Sahlins’s essayon the ‘original political society’ which opens Graeber andSahlins 2017. 

51.
 See Turnbull 1985 for a description. 

52.
 Women have to pretend they don’t know it’s really their ownbrothers and husbands, and so forth. No one quite knows whetherthe women really know (it seems they almost certainly do), 

whether the men really know the women know, whether thewomen know the men know they know, and so forth … 

53.
 This is why, as MacPherson – our principal source here – notesin his Political Theory of Possessive Individualism (1962),negative rights make so much better sense to us than positiverights – that is, despite the fact that the UN Human Rights Charterguarantees everyone jobs and livelihood as basic human rights, nogovernment is ever accused of a human rights abuse for throwingpeople out of work or removing subsidies on basic foodstuffs,even if it causes widespread hunger; but only for ‘trespass’ ontheir persons. 

54.
 Consider here the way that indigenous land claims almostinvariably involve invoking some notion of the sacred: sacredmountains, sacred precincts, earth mothers, ancestral burialgrounds and so forth. This is precisely by way of opposing theprevailing ideology, where what is ultimately sacred is thefreedom afforded by being able to make absolute, exclusiveproperty claims. 


55. Lowie 1928. 
56.
 Walens 1981: 56–8 provides an elaborate analysis of Kwakiutlfeast dishes, which are both corporeal and incorporeal property atthe same time since they can die and be reincarnated. 

57.
 Lowie 1928: 557; see also Zedeño 2008. 

58.
 Fausto 2008; see also Costa 2017. 

59.
 Costa and Fausto 2019: 204. 

60.
 Durkheim 1915, Book Two, Chapter One: ‘The PrincipalTotemic Beliefs: the Totem as Name and Emblem’; see also Lévi-Strauss 1966: 237–44. 


61. 
Strehlow 1947: 99–100. 
62. As in so many examples of what we are calling ‘free societies’,maternal nurture sought to inculcate a sense of autonomy andindependence; while male nurture – because the trials and ordealsof the Australian initiation ceremonies were, indeed, meant tocomplete a process of ‘growing up’ – was designed to ensure that, in those contexts at least, exactly the opposite instincts came tothe fore. In this connection it’s worth noting that a considerableliterature exists, starting from Barry, Child and Bacon (1959),which suggests, as Gardner put it, that ‘while non-foragers tend topush children towards obedience and responsibility, foragers tendto press for self-reliance, independence and individualachievement’ (1971: 543). 
5. MANY SEASONS AGO 
1.
 Indigenous population ﬁgures are highly contested, but there isagreement that the Paciﬁc littoral was among the most denselypopulated regions of aboriginal North America; see Denevan1992; Lightfoot and Parrish 2009. 

2.
 In Kroeber’s magisterial Handbook of the Indians of California,he at one point remarks that ‘Agriculture had only touched oneperiphery of the State, the Colorado River bottom, although theseed-using and fairly sedentary habits of virtually all the othertribes would have made possible the taking over of the art withrelatively little change of mode of life. Evidently planting is amore fundamental innovation to people used to depending onnature than it seems to those who have once acquired the practice’(1925: 815), though elsewhere he duly acknowledges that anumber of California peoples – ‘the Yurok, Hupa, and probablyWintun and Maidu’ – did in fact plant and grow tobacco (ibid:826). So planting could not have been such a conceptualinnovation after all. As Bettinger noted more recently, ‘thatagriculture never managed to spread to California was not due toisolation. California was always in more or less directcommunication with agriculturalists, whose products occasionallyturn up in archaeological sites’ (2015: 28). He argues thatCalifornians simply developed a ‘superior adaptation’ to the localenvironment; though this does not explain the systematic natureof the rejection. 


3. Hayden 1990. 
4.
 We still see this mindset to this day, of course: witness theendless fascination of journalists with the idea that somewhere on 

earth there must be some group of humans that could be said tohave lived in untouched isolation since the Stone Age. In fact, nosuch groups exist. 

5. 

This was admittedly not the only way to organize displays: mostUS museums before Boas organized objects by types: beadwork,canoes, masks, etc. 

6.
 ‘Ethnology’ is today a minor sub-branch of anthropology, but inthe early twentieth century it was regarded as the highest form ofsynthesis, bringing together the ﬁndings of hundreds of micro-studies to compare and analyse the connections and divergencesamong human societies. 

7.
 This is surely understandable. Exponents of scientiﬁc racismtook theories like the ‘Hamitic hypothesis’ to new extremes,notably followers of the Austrian-German ‘culture-circle school’(Kulturkreislehre), but equally many contemporary writings byFrench, Russian, British and American scholars. One particularinterest of the culture-circle school of ethnology were the originsof monotheism, long considered a unique and seminalcontribution of Jewish culture to Europe. The idea of studying anextraordinary variety of ‘herding cultures’, ‘shepherds’ and ‘cattlekeepers’ was at least partly to show that there was nothing specialabout the religious achievements of the ancient Israelites, and thatmonotheistic beliefs about ‘High Gods’ were quite likely to cropup in almost any tribal society that spent much of its time movingwith animals through arid or steppe landscapes. Published debateson this matter in the mid twentieth century could ﬁll a smalllibrary, starting with Wilhelm Schmidt’s twelve-volume Der Ursprung der Gottesidee (The Origin of the Idea of God, 1912–55). 


8. Wissler 1927: 885. 
9.
 Hence E. B. Tylor, the founder of British anthropology, wrotethat ‘though cat’s-cradle is now known over all western Europe, Iﬁnd no record of it at all ancient in our part of the world. It isknown in Southeast Asia, and the most plausible explanationseems to be that this is its centre of origin, whence it migratedwestward into Europe, and eastward and southward through 

Polynesia and into Australia.’ (1879: 26). A JSTOR search for‘string ﬁgures’ in anthropology journals between 1880 and 1940yields 212 results, and forty-two essays with ‘string ﬁgures’ in thetitle. 

10.
 Collected in Mauss 1968–9, and now also compiled andtranslated into English, with commentary and historical context,in Schlanger 2006. 

11.
 Since the 1930s and 1940s anthropologists turned ﬁrst tostructural-functionalist paradigms, then later to others thatfocused more on cultural meanings, but in either case concludedthat the historical origins of customs is not a particularlyinteresting question since it tells you almost nothing about whatthe meaning of the custom is today. 


12. See Dumont 1992: 196. 
13. 

This was, in some ways, closer to the kind of approach advocatedin today’s research on how culture spreads, although the ultimatecauses now tend to be sought in universal factors of humancognition (e.g. Sperber 2005). 

14.
 Mauss, in Schlanger 2006: 44, and see also pp. 69, 137. 

15.
 For a general overview and history of Northwest Coast peoples,ecology and material culture see Ames and Maschner 1999; forthe equivalent in Aboriginal California see Lightfoot and Parrish2009. 

16.
 E.g. Hayden 2014. 

17.
 Such broad-brush distinctions based on food preferences andresource availability were at the foundation of ‘culture areas’when these were ﬁrst deﬁned by Clark Wissler and others in theearly twentieth century. In The American Indian (1922), Wissleractually ﬁrst deﬁned ‘food areas’ and then subdivided them into‘culture areas’. For more recent and critical views of these broad ecological classiﬁcations see Moss 1993; Grier 2017. It’s worthnoting that the presence or absence of slavery never factors intothe ‘culture areas’ described in Wissler’s inﬂuential book The American Indian (admittedly, chattel slavery was an unusual 

institution among the indigenous societies of North America, butit did exist). 

18.
 Actually, he was speaking of a cluster of related peoples,primarily the Yurok, Karuk and Hupa, who shared very similarcultural and social institutions even though they spoke entirelyunrelated languages. In the anthropological literature, the Yurokhave often come to stand in for Californians in general (just as‘Kwakiutl’ have come to stand in for all Northwest Coast peoples), which is unfortunate since, as we’ll see, they were insome ways quite unusual. 

19.
 Goldschmidt 1951: 506–8. In fact, all this was unusual even forCalifornia: as we’ll see, most Californian societies used shellmoney, but a man or woman’s wealth was ritually destroyed atdeath. 

20.
 Benedict 1934: 156–95. The comparison between NorthwestCoast societies and the noble households of medieval Europe wasexplored by Claude Lévi-Strauss in a piece which is most famousfor its deﬁnition of ‘house societies’, and is reprinted as part ofhis collected essays under the title ‘Anthropology and Myth’(Lévi-Strauss 1987: 151; and see also Lévi-Strauss 1982 [1976]). 

21.
 Hajda (2005) provides a ﬁne-grained discussion of the differentforms of slavery on the lower Columbia River and further northon the Northwest Coast, and how these developed in the earlyperiod of European contact (1792–1830). But she does not go intothe wider contrast with indigenous societies south of CapeMendocino, which rejected slavery altogether. 


22. Sahlins 2004: 69. 
23. 
Goldschmidt 1951: 513. 
24. Drucker 1951: 131. 
25. Elias 1969. 
26.
 See Boas and Hunt 1905; Codere 1950. Ethnographers in theearly twentieth century certainly regarded the occasionalintroduction of such practices into northern Californian societiesas highly exotic and anomalous, as in Leslie Spier’s (1930) 

discussion of the Klamath, who took up slaving and limitedaspects of potlatch after their adoption of the horse. 

27.
 Powers 1877: 408; Vayda 1967; Goldschmidt and Driver 1940. 

28.
 See, especially, Blackburn 1976: 230–35. 

29.
 Chase-Dunn and Mann 1998: 143–4. Napoleon Chagnon (1970:17–18) went so far as to argue that ‘it was functionally necessaryfor the Yurok to “desire” dentalia [i.e. money], but only if theywere obtained from their neighbours. The social prestige involvedwith obtaining wealth in this fashion effected a more stableadaptation to the distribution of resources by allowing trade to bethe alternative to raid in times of local insufﬁciency.’ 

30.
 See Donald 1997. 

31.
 Ames 2008; cf. Coupland, Steward and Patton 2010. 

32.
 The case for some form of social stratiﬁcation in this early periodwas convincingly laid out in numerous pioneering works by thearchaeologist Kenneth Ames (e.g. Ames 2001). 

33.
 Arnold 1995; Ames 2008; Angelbeck and Grier 2012. 34. Santos-Granero 2009. 


35. Patterson 1982; and thus, Goldman on Kwakiutl slaves: ‘captivealiens, they had no kinship connections with their new homes,and no genuine ties any longer with their original tribes andvillages. As persons violently torn loose from their roots, slavesexisted in a state equivalent to being dead. Being on the marginsof death they were by Kwakiutl standards the proper sacriﬁcialvictims for cannibalistic feasts.’ (1975: 54) 
36. Patterson 1982; Meillassoux 1996. 37. Santos-Granero 2009: 42–4. 38. See Wolf 1982: 79–82. 
39. According to Santos-Granero, who has carefully compiled
information about what raiders actually said they were doing. 40. Fausto 1999. 
41.
 Santos-Granero 2009: 156. This does not appear to be a mereanalogy: slaves in most Amazonian societies that kept them seem 

to have had the same formal status as pets; pets in turn were, aswe already observed, seen as the paradigm for property moregenerally in much of Amazonia (see also Costa 2017). Forinstance, despite the kind treatment, a man or woman’s dogs,horses, parrots and slaves were typically all ritually sacriﬁced ontheir death (Santos-Granero, op. cit.: 192–4). 

42.
 See also Graeber 2006. It is interesting in this connection that theGuaicurú, though they captured farmers, did not set those theytook as slaves to work planting or tending crops, but integratedthem into their own foraging lifestyle. 


43. Powers 1877: 69. 
44.
 They’d been among the ﬁrst on the Paciﬁc littoral to succumb todiseases introduced by traders and settlers. Combined withgenocidal attacks, this caused the Chetco and nearby groups tosuffer almost total demographic collapse in the nineteenthcentury. As a result, there are no detailed accounts of these groupsto compare with the two major ‘culture areas’ of California andthe Northwest Coast, which lie to either side of their formerterritories. Indeed, this complex subsector of the coast, betweenthe Eel River and the mouth of the Columbia River, posedsigniﬁcant problems of classiﬁcation for scholars seeking todelineate the boundaries of those culture areas, and the issue oftheir afﬁliation remains contentious today. See Kroeber 1939;Jorgensen 1980; Donald 2003. 

45.
 The historicity of First Nations oral narratives concerning ancientmigrations and wars on the Northwest Coast has been the subjectof an innovative study which combines archaeology with thestatistical modelling of demographic shifts that can bescientiﬁcally dated back to periods well over a millennium intothe past. Its authors conclude that the ‘Indigenous oral record hasnow been subjected to extremely rigorous testing. Our result –that the [in this case] Tsimshian oral record is correct (properlynot disproved) in its accounting of events from over 1,000 yearsago – is a major milestone in the evaluation of the validity ofIndigenous oral traditions.’ (Edinborough et al. 2017: 12440) 

46.
 We cannot know how common such cautionary tales werebecause they are not the kind of stories early observers werelikely to have recorded (this particular tale survived only becauseChase believed the Wogies might have been shipwreckedJapanese!). 

47.
 Spott and Kroeber 1942: 232. 

48.
 Intriguingly, in some parts of California reliance on acorns as adietary staple can be traced back some four millennia, long beforethe intensive exploitation of ﬁsh. See Tushingham and Bettinger2013. 

49.
 On the Northwest Coast, bulk harvesting of salmon and otheranadromous species extends back to 2000 BC and remained a cornerstone of aboriginal economy until recent times. See Amesand Maschner 1999. 


50. Suttles 1968. 
51. 

Turner and Loewen 1998. 

52.
 Take, for example, Joaquin Miller’s (1873: 373–4) description inhis Life Amongst the Modocs, Unwritten History: ‘Here we passed groves of magniﬁcent oak. Their trunks are ﬁve and sixfeet in diameter, and the boughs were then covered with acornsand fairly matted with mistletoe. Coming down to the banks ofthe Pit river, we heard the songs and shouts of Indian girlsgathering acorns. They were up in the oaks and half covered withmistletoe. They would beat off the acorns with sticks, or cut offthe little branches with tomahawks, and the older squawsgathered them from the ground, and threw them over theirshoulders in baskets borne by a strap around the forehead.’ (Hethen goes off on an excursus about how Indian girls haveexquisitely small and attractive feet, despite not wearing tightEuropean-style shoes, thus exposing a ‘popular delusion’ amongoverweening mothers in frontier communities of the time: feetcould be free, and still elegant.) 

53.
 As Bettinger puts it, the acorn is ‘so very back-loaded that itscapture as stores represents little saved time … withcorrespondingly less potential for developing inequality, likewise 

for attracting raiders or developing organizational means todefend or retaliate’ (2015: 233). His argument basically seems tobe that what the remote ancestors of the Maidu, Pomo, Miwok,Wintu and other Californian groups sacriﬁced in short-termnutritional value they gained over the long term in food security. 

54.
 Much of what we’ve presented in the preceding paragraphs isbased on a more detailed argument by Tushingham and Bettinger(2013), but the basis of their approach – including the suggestionthat forager slavery is rooted in the seasonal exploitation ofaquatic resources – can be found in publications going all the wayback to Herman Nieboer’s Slavery as an Industrial System(1900). 

55.
 For a general reconstruction of traditional raiding practices on


the Northwest Coast, and further discussion, see Donald 1997. 56. Drucker 1951: 279. 
57. Golla 1987: 94. 
58.
 Compare Ames 2001; 2008. Slaves could and often did attemptto escape as well, often successfully – especially when a numberof slaves from the same community were held in the same place(see e.g. Swadesh 1948: 80). 

59.
 There appears to have been something of a transitional zone onthe lower reaches of the Columbia River where chattel slaverydwindled into various forms of peonage, while beyond stretched alargely slave-free zone (Hajda 2005); and for other limitedexceptions see Kroeber 1925: 308–20; Powers 1877: 254–75; andSpier 1930). 


60. 
MacLeod 1928; Mitchell 1985; Donald 1997. 
61. Kroeber 1925: 49. Macleod (1929: 102) was unconvinced of thispoint, noting the existence of similar legal mechanisms amongTlingit and other Northwest Coast groups, which did not preventthe ‘subjection of foreign groups, tribute taking, and enslavementof captives’. Yet all sources concur that the only real slaves inNorthwest California were debt-slaves, and that even these werefew in number (cf. Bettinger 2015: 171). If not Kroeber’s then 
some other mechanism for the suppression of chattel slavery must
have been at work. 62. Donald 1997: 124–6. 
63. Goldschmidt 1951: 514. 64. Brightman 1999. 
65. Boas 1966: 172; cf. Goldman 1975: 102. 
66. Kan 2001. 
67. Lévi-Strauss 1982. 68. Garth 1976: 338. 
69.
 Buckley 2002: 117; cf. Kroeber 1925: 40, 107. 

70.
 ‘The northwest is perhaps also the only part of California thatknew slavery. This institution rested wholly upon an economicbasis here. The Chumash may have held slaves; but preciseinformation is lacking. The Colorado River tribes kept womencaptives from motives of sentiment, but did not exploit theirlabor.’ (Kroeber 1925: 834) 

71.
 Loeb 1926: 195; Du Bois 1935: 66; Goldschmidt 1951: 340–41;Bettinger 2015: 198. Bettinger notes that (archaeologicallyvisible) inequalities of wealth steadily declined after theintroduction of dentalium in central California, and argues that theoverall effect of the introduction of money appears to have beento limit debt relations, and thus reduce overall dependency and‘inequality.’ 


72. Pilling 1989; Lesure 1998. 
73.
 While captives taken in war were quickly redeemed, it seems thatunlike in other parts of California, where tribal divisions assumedcollective responsibility for doing so, here it was up to theindividual family. Debt peonage seems to have resulted frominability to pay. Bettinger (2015: 171) suggests that this nexus ofdebt and warfare may partly explain the demographicfragmentation of Northwest Californian groups and break-up ofcollective groups to begin with, which were never very strong(totemic clans, for instance, were absent), but did exist furthersouth. One early source (Waterman 1903: 201) adds that killers 

unable to pay compensation, but not forced into peonage, becamea disgrace to their communities and retreated into isolation, oftenremaining there even after settling their debts. The overallsituation did come to look a bit like a class system as men ofinherited wealth often initiated wars, directed the peacemakingceremonies that followed, and then managed the resulting debtarrangements – in the course of which one class of poorerhousehold would fall into marginal status, its members scatteringacross the landscape and dissolving into patrilineal bands, whileanother concentrated as dependants around the victors. However,unlike the situation on the Northwest Coast, the degree to whichgrandees could compel their ‘slaves’ to work was decidedlylimited (Spott and Kroeber 1942: 149–53). 

74.
 As further argued in Wengrow and Graeber (2018), withsubsequent comments by regional experts in the archaeology andanthropology of West Coast foragers and their descendants, andauthors’ response. 


6. GARDENS OF ADONIS 
1. 
Phaedrus 276B. 
2.
 For the former opinion, see Detienne 1994, and for the latter,Piccaluga 1977. 

3.
 From the children’s story Where the Wild Things Are (1963). 4. Mellaart 1967. 


5.
 Our understanding of the site largely follows that developed byits recent excavator, Ian Hodder, except that we have emphasizedthe importance of seasonal variations in social structure to agreater degree. See Hodder 2006; and for further information,images and databases see also www.catalhoyuk.com, withreferences to multiple ﬁeld reports, sections of which are alsoreferred to below. 

6.
 Meskell et al. 2008. 

7.
 See, for example, Gimbutas 1982. More recent studies make thepoint that Gimbutas’s publications often inﬂated the frequency offemale forms within Neolithic ﬁgurine assemblages, which oncloser inspection contain a more balanced proportion of clearlyfemale, clearly male, mixed or simply unsexed forms (e.g. Bailey2017). 

8.
 Charlene Spretnak (2011) discusses the successive waves ofcriticism levelled at Gimbutas and provides further references. 

9.
 The key publication on the genomics of steppe migration is Haaket al. 2015. Shortly after these ﬁndings were published, theeminent prehistorian Colin Renfrew delivered a lecture at theUniversity of Chicago entitled ‘Marija Rediviva [Marija BornAgain]: DNA and Indo-European Origins’. He suggested thatGimbutas’s ‘kurgan hypothesis’ had been ‘magniﬁcentlyvindicated’ by the ﬁndings of ancient DNA, which suggest linksbetween the dispersal of Indo-European languages and thewestward spread of the Yamnaya cultural complex from thesteppe north of the Black Sea in the late fourth and early third 

millennia BC. It’s worth noting that these ﬁndings contradictRenfrew’s own (1987) hypothesis, that Indo-European languagesoriginated in the region of Anatolia and spread, some millenniaearlier, with the dispersal of Neolithic farming cultures. Otherarchaeologists, however, feel that the genomic data is still toocoarse to permit talk of large-scale migrations, let alone establishlinks between biological inheritance, material culture and thespread of languages (for a detailed critique see Furholt 2018). 

10.
 See here Sanday’s Women at the Center (2002). Sanday notesthat Gimbutas rejects the term ‘matriarchy’ because she sees it asa mirror image of patriarchy, and therefore that it would implyautocratic rule or political dominance of women, and thereforeprefers ‘matric’. Sanday notes that Minangkabau themselves usethe English term ‘matriarchate’, employing it in a different sense(ibid.: 230–37). 

11.
 See Hodder 2003; 2004; 2006, plate 22. For the most recentlydiscovered statuette of an (elderly?) female in limestone see alsoChris Kark’s short but informative item in Stanford News,‘Archaeologists from Stanford ﬁnd an 8,000-year-old “goddessﬁgurine” in central Turkey’ (2016), including comments from keyresearchers. 

12.
 For the occurrence in these regions of likely masked ﬁgurines,and the connections between ﬁgurines and other Neolithicdepictions of masked human forms, see e.g. Belcher 2014:passim; Bánffy 2017. 

13.
 Hodder 2006: 210, with further references. 

14.
 Hodder and Cessford 2004. 

15.
 Çatalhöyük actually comprises two main archaeological mounds.Everything we’ve been talking about so far applies to the early‘East Mound’, while the ‘West Mound’ relates mainly to laterperiods of prehistory, beyond the scope of our discussion here. 


16. Matthews 2005. 
17.
 See Fairbairn et al. 2006. 

18.
 Of the kind we discussed in Chapter Three. 

19.
 Bogaard et al. 2014, with further references. 

20.
 Arbuckle 2013; Arbuckle and Makarewicz 2009. 

21.
 See Schefﬂer 2003. 

22.
 In terms of environmental history, the upland regions of theFertile Crescent fall within the Irano-Turanian bioclimatic zone. Current reconstructions suggest that the establishment ofdeciduous woodlands in this region did not follow directly fromthe onset of warmer and wetter conditions at the beginning of theHolocene, but was to a signiﬁcant degree a product of landscape-management strategies carried out initially by foragerpopulations, and subsequently by cultivators and herders (Asoutiand Kabukcu 2014). 

23.
 Based on the analysis of carbonized residues of wood found inarchaeological sites, Asouti et al. (2015) reconstruct a moisterenvironment for this region in the Early Holocene, withconsiderably more tree cover than is apparent today, especiallyalong and adjacent to the Jordan Rift Valley. Towards theMediterranean coast these lowland regions acted as refugia forwood- and grassland species, which survived continuouslythrough the Last Glacial Maximum and into the Early Holocene. 

24.
 Prehistorians have experimented with all kinds of different waysof classifying the Fertile Crescent into ‘culture areas’ or‘interaction spheres’ corresponding to the main distinctions of theLate and Epi-Palaeolithic era, and the Early (or Pre-Pottery)Neolithic. The history of these various classiﬁcations is reviewedand evaluated by Asouti (2006). Here we follow the distinctionsoutlined by Sherratt (2007), which are based on the correlation ofbroad ecological and cultural patterns rather than isolated (andfairly arbitrary) categories of archaeological data, such asdifferent ways of manufacturing stone tools and weapons.Sherratt’s classiﬁcation also has the advantage of avoidingteleological tendencies found in some other studies, whichassume all evidence of cultural complexity (such as substantialsettlements and architecture) must be in some way related to thedevelopment of food production; in other words, he allows for 

such developments within foraging societies that had no stronginvestment in the domestication of plants and animals. 

25.
 For craft specialization in Early Neolithic communities see


Wright et al. 2008; and, in general, Asouti and Fuller 2013. 26. Sherratt 1999. 
27. Willcox 2005; 2007. 
28. For western Iran and Iraqi Kurdistan see Zeder and Hesse 2000;and for eastern Anatolia see Peters et al. 2017. 
29. Asouti and Fuller 2013: 314–23, 326–8. 30. Harari 2014: 80. 
31.
 Hillman and Davies 1990. 

32.
 Maeda et al. 2016. 

33.
 The initial growth of permanent villages – between 11,000 and9500 BC – may have had much to do with a temporary return ofglacial weather conditions (known as the ‘Younger Dryas’episode) after the end of the last Ice Age obliging foragers in thelowland parts of the Fertile Crescent to commit to well-wateredlocations (Moore and Hillman 1992). 

34.
 This conclusion is based on a combination of genetic andbotanical data from samples recovered in archaeologicalexcavations, as explained further below; and for a summary, seeFuller 2010; Fuller and Allaby 2010. 

35.
 See Willcox et al. 2008; Willcox 2012. 

36.
 Fuller 2007; 2010; Asouti and Fuller 2013, with further


references. 37. Cf. Scott 2017: 72. 
38.
 In fact, they did not even wish it on their slaves. 

39.
 As proposed by Fuller 2010: 10; see also Fuller et al. 2010. 

40.
 The signiﬁcance of ﬂood-recession cultivation for the origins offarming was ﬁrst pointed out in a seminal (1980) article byAndrew Sherratt; republished and updated in Sherratt 1997. 

41.
 Cultivation systems of this kind have been pursued up untilrecent times in rural India and Pakistan, and also in the American 

Southwest. As one geographer observed of Pueblo cultivation inNew Mexico: ‘The kinds of places suitable for farming under thesystem … have existed from the time of prehistoric settlement;but cultivation, by its disturbance of the surface, leads to washingand channelling, which temporarily or permanently ruin a ﬁeld.Thus, at the same site the best places to plant are limited in areaand changeable in position. The Indians of the present day, liketheir prehistoric ancestors, hardly disturb the ground, as they donot plough but merely insert the seed in a hole made with plantingstick … Even with the use of their methods ﬁelds must be periodically abandoned for later reoccupation. One of theprincipal causes of such shifts in location lies in the habits ofephemeral streams in the stage of alluviation.’ (Bryan 1929: 452) 

42.
 For which see Sanday 1981, especially her Chapter Two: ‘Scripts


for Male Dominance’. 43. Diamond 1987. 
44. See Murdock 1937; Murdock and Provost 1973. 45. Owen 1994; 1996. 46. Barber 1991; 1994. 
47. Soffer et al. 2000. 48. Lévi-Strauss 1966: 269. 
49.
 See MacCormack and Strathern (eds) 1980. 

50.
 We ﬁnd ourselves reminded of Silvia Federici’s Caliban and the Witch (1998), where she showed how, in Europe, such ‘magical’approaches to production came to be associated not just withwomen but with witchcraft. Federici argues that the elimination ofsuch attitudes was essential for the establishment of modern (male-dominated) science, and also for the growth of capitalistwage labour: ‘This is how we must read the attack againstwitchcraft and against that magical view of the world which,despite the best efforts of the Church, had continued to prevail ona popular level through the Middle Ages … In this perspective …every element – herbs, plants, metals, and most of all the humanbody – hid virtues and powers peculiar to it … From palmistry todivination, from the use of charms to sympathetic healing, magic 


opened a vast number of possibilities … Eradicating thesepractices was a necessary condition for the capitalistrationalisation of work, since magic appeared as an illicit form ofpower and an instrument to obtain what one wanted without work … “Magic kills industry,” lamented Francis Bacon, admitting thatnothing repelled him so much as the assumption that one couldobtain results with a few idle experiments, rather than with thesweat of one’s brow.’ (Federici 1998: 142) 
51. Lévi-Strauss 1966: 15. 
52. Wengrow 1998; 2003; and for the evolution of Neolithiccounting devices, and its relationship to the invention of script,see also Schmandt-Besserat 1992. 
53. Vidale 2013. 
54.
 Schmidt 2006; Köksal-Schmidt and Schmidt 2010; Notroff et al.2016. A stone ﬁgure known to archaeologists as the ‘gift bearer’also carries a human head to some unknown destination. Imagesof many of these sculptures and other ﬁnds from Göbekli Tepecan be found at https://www.dainst.blog/the-tepe-telegrams/ 


55.
 Schmidt 1998; Stordeur 2000, ﬁg. 6.1, 2. 

56.
 O. Dietrich et al. 2019. 

57.
 Which is not to say that such evidence for violent conﬂict isentirely lacking either. The largest preserved sample of humanremains from any Early Holocene site in the Middle East comesfrom the site of Körtik Tepe, which lies northeast of Göbekli Tepeon a bank of the Upper Tigris, twelve miles from the moderntown of Batman, ﬁrmly within the upland sector of the FertileCrescent. Remains of more than 800 individuals have been recovered from the site, of which the 446 individuals so faranalysed reveal high rates of skeletal trauma (of 269 skulls, some


34.2 per cent showed signs of cranial injury, including two femaleskulls with penetrative depressed fractures; post-cranial injurieswere found on over 20 per cent of the individuals studied,including three cases of healed parry fractures to the forearm).Given the absence of other signs of warfare, this evidence hasbeen explained – perhaps not altogether persuasively – in terms of interpersonal violence within a community of settled hunter.ﬁsher-gatherers living in a region of abundant wild resources. Asigniﬁcant number of the human remains recovered from KörtikTepe were subject to post-mortem modiﬁcation, including thepresence of cut marks on human crania, although none of thesecan be deﬁnitively linked to scalping or the taking of trophy heads(as reported by Erdal 2015). 
58.
 Faunal and botanical remains from Çayönü Tepesi reveal aﬂexible economy which underwent numerous changes over aperiod of some 3,000 years. In the earlier phases of the site, whichconcern us here, its inhabitants made extensive use of wild pulsesand nuts, as well as peas, lentil and bitter vetch, with smalleramounts of wild cereals. Cultivation of at least some of these crops is likely, but there is no clear evidence of plantdomestication until the later phases of the site. Animal remainssuggest its inhabitants pursued mixed herding and huntingstrategies which varied over many centuries, including at times astrong reliance on pigs and wild boar, as well as sheep, cattle,gazelle and red deer, and also smaller game such as hares (seePearson et al. 2013, with further references). 

59.
 For the House of Skulls and the analysis of associated humanremains at Çayönü Tepesi see Özbek 1988; 1992; Schirmer 1990;Wood 1992; also Kornienko’s (2015) broader review of evidencefor ritual violence in the northern part of the Fertile Crescent.Isotopic analysis of human remains indicates that the individualswhose remains came to be stored in the Skull Building hadsigniﬁcantly different diets to those buried elsewhere on the site,which might indicate local differences of status (Pearson et al.2013), or conceivably the incorporation of outsiders into localmortuary rituals. 

60.
 Allsen (2016) provides a sweeping account of the practical andsymbolic relationships between hunting and monarchy inEurasian history, which are remarkably consistent from theMiddle East to India, Central Asia and China, and from antiquitydown to the time of the British Raj. 

61.
 Gresky et al. 2017. 

62.
 No doubt these contrasts could also be found within the societies themselves; the key difference lies in how these various styles oftechnical activity were valued, and which were selected as thebasis of artistic and ritual systems. For the overall absence ofgender hierarchy in Early Neolithic societies of the southernLevant, and evidence for women’s participation on equal terms inritual and economic activities, see also Peterson 2016. 

63.
 Kuijt 1996; Croucher 2012; Slon et al. 2014. 64. Santana 2012. 


65. 
Confronted with objects they can’t explain, archaeologists oftenturn to ethnographic analogies. Among the cases considered hereis that of the Iatmul of the Sepik River in Papua New Guinea, apeople who practised skull decoration until quite recent times. Forthe Iatmul, the making of skull portraits was intimately linked tohead-hunting. Generally, it began by taking enemy heads inwarfare, and was exclusively performed by men. The head of adefeated enemy was honoured by decorating it with clay,pigments, hair and shell. Once transformed, it was then cared forand ‘fed’ alongside other skulls in a special men’s house(Silverman 2001: 117 ff.). This case is important, because itshows how ancestor veneration and the violent taking of heads inconﬂict may, in some cases, form part of the same ritual system.In 2008 the social anthropologist Alain Testart published anarticle in the journal Paléorient arguing that similar things musthave been going on among Neolithic societies in the Middle East,and archaeologists had missed the obvious connection betweenskull portraits and head-hunting. That prompted an outpouring ofresponses from archaeologists in the same journal, manyindignant, pointing out the lack of evidence for warfare amongthose same communities, and even proposing that skull-modellingwas a ritual strategy for promoting peaceful and egalitarianrelations among Neolithic villagers (as ﬁrst argued by Kuijt1996). What we are suggesting here is that both parties to thedebate were, in a sense, correct; but that they were really talkingat cross purposes; or rather about different sides of the same coin.On the one hand, we should acknowledge mounting evidence that predatory violence (including the display of trophy skulls) was atleast ritually and symbolically important among foragers in thenorthern (upland) part of the Fertile Crescent. Equally, we mightconsider if skull portraits (or ‘plastered skulls’) represent aninversion of such values in the more southerly (lowland) parts ofthe region. Not everything has to ﬁt the same model, just becauseit was happening at the same time, and in this case just theopposite seems likely to be true. 
66. Clarke 1973: 11. 
7. THE ECOLOGY OF FREEDOM 
1.
 For spectacular developments in stone vessel and beadproduction in the upper valley of the Tigris see Özkaya andCo.kun 2009. 

2.
 Elinor Ostrom (1990) offers a range of ﬁeld studies and historicalexamples, as well as formal economic models for the collectivemanagement of shared natural resources; but the basic point wasalready widely noted in earlier studies, some of which we citebelow. 


3. 
Georgescu-Roegen 1976: 215. 
4.
 Periodic repartition of land at the local level was also discussedin O’Curry’s On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish (1873), and in Baden-Powell’s famous treatise on The Indian Village Community (1896). See, more recently, Enajero 2015. 

5.
 Palestinian villages under Ottoman and British rule practisedannual redistribution of communal grazing and farming landsunder masha’a tenure, whereby owners of adjacent plots pooledresources to complete labour-intensive tasks such as ploughing,seeding, weeding and harvesting, responding to annualﬂuctuations in rainfall (Atran 1986). In Bali, irrigated rice-farming traditionally operated through a system of elected ‘watercommittees’. Local representatives attend temple meetings, whereaccess to land and water is negotiated annually on a consensualbasis (Lansing 1991). Other examples of sustainable landmanagement under some form of communal organization can be 

found in the recent histories of Sri Lanka (Pfaffenberger 1998),and also Japan, for instance (Brown 2006). 

6.
 Fuller 2010, with further references. 7. Diamond 1997: 178. 


8.
 Bettinger and Baumhoff 1982; Bettinger 2015: 21–8. 

9.
 For a review of how such processes played out in various parts ofthe world see Fuller and Lucas 2017. None of this is to deny thefact that crops frequently ‘got around’ various parts of the OldWorld, and often on a surprising scale, as with the westwardtransfer of Chinese millets to the Indus, mirrored by the eastwarddissemination of western/central Asian bread wheat to Chinaaround 2000 BC. But efforts (notably by Jones et al. 2011) tocharacterize such early crop transfers as precursors to the‘Columbian exchange’ of the sixteenth century AD (see below) aremisplaced, since they ignore a number of important contrasts.These are spelled out by Boivin, Fuller and Crowther (2012), whonote that early crop transfers in Eurasia took place within a ‘long.term, slow-growing network of connections and exchanges’ overmany millennia, often initially in small and experimentalquantities, and driven not by centres of urban expansion but byhighly mobile and often small-scale intermediary groups such asthe mounted pastoralists of the Eurasian steppe or the maritimenomads of the Indian Ocean. It was precisely this slow millennialhistory of cultural exchange and gene-ﬂow between Eurasianspecies that prevented the kind of major ecological ruptureswhich occurred once those same species were unleashed upon theAmericas and Oceania. 


10. Crosby 1972; 1986. 
11.
 See Richerson, Boyd and Bettinger 2001. 

12. 

Recent estimates for the population of the Americas beforeEuropeans landed in 1492 are around 60 million. The ﬁgure of 50million lost hectares of arable land is calculated on the basis of a land use per capita model, in the key study by Koch et al. 2019. 

13.
 For eustatic changes in sea levels at the Late Pleistocene toHolocene transition see Day et al. 2012; Pennington et al. 2016; 

and for the role of anthropogenic activities in altering terrestrialspecies’ distributions over the same time period Richerson et al.2001; Boivin et al. 2016. 

14.
 See Bailey and Milner 2002; Bailey and Flemming 2008; Marean2014. 

15.
 Boivin et al. 2016, with further references. 

16.
 Clarke’s (1978) Mesolithic Europe: The Economic Basis remains a foundational study of these processes; for a more up-to-date(and global) overview see Mithen 2003; and also Rowley-Conwy2001; Straus et al. (eds) 1990. 

17.
 Bookchin 1982. In adopting the title of Bookchin’s landmarkvolume on social ecology, we cannot follow his own ideas abouthuman prehistory or the origins of agriculture, which are based oninformation that is now many decades out of date. We do,however, ﬁnd much to learn much from his basic insight: thathuman engagements with the biosphere are always stronglyconditioned by the types of social relationships and social systemsthat people form among themselves. The mutual differentiation offorager ecologies on the American West Coast, discussed inChapter Five, would be another excellent example of the sameprinciple. 

18.
 As the anthropologist Eric Wolf once put it. 

19.
 Bruce Smith (2001) discusses the whole phenomenon under therubric of ‘low level food production’, which he takes to describeeconomies that occupy ‘the vast and diverse middle groundbetween hunting-ﬁshing-foraging and agriculture’. 

20.
 Wild et al. 2004; Schulting and Fibiger (eds) 2012; Meyer et al.2015; see also Teschler-Nicola et al. 1996. 

21.
 For a broad account of the spread of Neolithic farming to Europe,understood through behavioural ecology and theories of culturalevolution, see Shennan 2018. 

22.
 Coudart 1998; Jeunesse 1997; Kerig 2003; van der Velde 1990. 

23.
 Shennan et al. 2013; and see also Shennan 2009; Shennan andEdinborough 2006. 

24.
 Haak et al. 2005; 2010; Larson et al. 2007; Lipson et al. 2017. 

25.
 Zvelebil 2006; and for evidence of status differences marked bywealth in Mesolithic cemeteries see O’Shea and Zvelebil (1984)on cemeteries from the region of Karelia; Nilsson Stutz (2010) onsouthern Scandinavia; and Schulting (1996) on the Breton coast. 

26. 

Kashina and Zhulnikov 2011; Veil et al. 2012. 

27.
 Schulting and Richards 2001. 

28.
 Golitko and Keeley (2007) envisage hostile encounters betweenNeolithic farmers and more established Mesolithic populations,noting that fortiﬁed villages tend to cluster around the fringes ofNeolithic colonization. 

29.
 Wengrow 2006, Chapters Two to Three; Kuper and Kroepelin2006. 

30.
 Wengrow et al. 2014, with further references. 

31.
 See Spriggs 1997; Sheppard 2011. 

32.
 Denham et al. 2003; Golson et al. (eds) 2017; see also Yen 1995. 

33.
 See Spriggs 1995; the Lapita habit of leapfrogging establishedpopulations into empty spaces may be partially conﬁrmed by theﬁndings of ancient DNA, for which: Skoglund et al. 2016. 

34.
 Kirch 1990; Kononenko et al. 2016. Gell (1993) provides asystematic, comparative study of regional traditions of body artand tattooing in more recent Polynesian societies, and their socialand conceptual permutations. 

35.
 Holdaway and Wendrich (eds) 2017. 

36.
 As we noted, Lapita is associated with the dispersal ofAustronesian languages. Correlations between the spread offarming and language also seem likely for Nilotic cultures (andthe much later Bantu expansion from western to southern Africa).For a general consideration of these and other cases of language-farming dispersal see Bellwood 2005; Bellwood and Renfrew(eds) 2002. An association between Indo-European and the spreadof Early Neolithic farming in Europe is now considered unlikely(see Haak et al. 2015, with further references). 


37. Capriles 2019. 
38. Fausto 1999; Costa 2017. 39. Descola 1994; 2005. 40. Roosevelt 2013. 
41.
 Hornborg 2005; Hornborg and Hill (eds) 2011. 

42.
 ‘Complex’ being the operative word here – the indigenous arts ofAmazonia are incredibly rich and diverse, with many regional andethnic variations. Analysts have, nonetheless, found similarprinciples at work in visual culture over surprisingly largeregions. For a Brazilian perspective see Lagrou 2009. 

43.
 Erickson 2008; Heckenberger and Neves 2009; Heckenberger etal. 2008; Pärssinen et al. 2009. 

44.
 Lombardo et al. 2020. 

45.
 Piperno 2011; Clement et al. 2015; see also Fausto and Neves2018. 

46.
 Arroyo-Kalin 2010; Schmidt et al. 2014; Woods et al. (eds) 2009. 47. Scott 2009. 


48. 
Smith 2001. 
49. Evidence derives from archaeological sites in the valley of
Mexico’s Rio Balsas; Ranere et al. 2009. 50. Smith 2006. 51. Fuller 2007: 911–15. 
52.
 Redding 1998. Such ‘ﬂirtations’ probably took the form ofselective herd management with husbandry limited to females,allowing the males to roam wild. 

53.
 In the archaeological phase termed Pre-Pottery Neolithic C(PPNC). 

54.
 Colledge et al. 2004; 2005. It’s important to note that a decline incrop diversity may have commenced within the Fertile Crescent,at roughly the time when the Neolithic farming package wascarried north and west towards Europe, via Turkey and theBalkans. By around 7000 BC (the end of the Late Pre-PotteryNeolithic B period) average crop diversity at sites in the FertileCrescent had dropped from ten or eleven original founder crops to 

a mere ﬁve or six. Interestingly, what followed in this region(during the PPNC period) was a downturn in population,associated with the abandonment of large villages and thebeginning of a more dispersed pattern of human settlement. 

55.
 See also Bogaard 2005. 


8. IMAGINARY CITIES 
1. E.g. Dunbar 1996; 2010. 
2.
 Dunbar 1996: 69–71. The cognitive basis of Dunbar’s Number isinferred from comparative studies of non-human primates, whichsuggest a correlation between neocortex size and group size invarious species of monkeys and apes (Dunbar 2002). Thesigniﬁcance of those ﬁndings for primate studies is not inquestion here, only whether they can be extended in any simple ordirect way to our own species. 

3.
 Bird et al. 2019; see also Hill et al. 2011; Migliano et al. 2017. 

4.
 Sikora et al. 2017. 5. Bloch 2013. 6. Anderson 1991. 


7. See Bird et al. 2019; and compare Bloch 2008. 8. Fischer 1977: 454. 
9.
 See especially Childe 1950. 

10.
 We hope to treat the rich African material, outside ancient Egypt,more fully in future work, along with many other valuable casesthat could not be included here, such as the Pueblo traditions ofthe American Southwest, to name but one. For important existingdiscussions of African material, which bear out a number of ourobservations about the decentralized and self-organizing nature ofearly cities, see e.g. S. McIntosh 2009; R. McIntosh 2005. 

11.
 Most archaeologists are generally happy to call any denselyinhabited settlement over around 150 hectares, or certainly over200 hectares, in size a ‘city’ (see, for example, Fletcher 1995). 

12.
 Fleming 2009: passim. 

13.
 For direct evidence of in-migration to Teotihuacan, based onisotopic studies of human remains, see White et al. 2008; forsimilar evidence at Harappa see Valentine et al. 2015. For ageneral discussion of neighbourhoods and their role in theformation of early cities, Smith 2015. 

14.
 Plunket and Uruñuela 2006. 

15.
 Day et al. 2007; Pennington et al. 2016. 

16.
 See Pournelle 2003. 

17.
 Sherratt 1997; Styring et al. 2017. 

18.
 See Pournelle 2003; Scott 2017. 

19.
 For China see Underhill et al. 2008; for Peru see Shady Solis,Haas and Creamer 2001. 

20.
 Inomata et al. 2020. They key site here is in Tabasco State, andgoes by the name Aguada Fénix. Dated between 1000 and 800 BC,it’s now recognized as the ‘oldest monumental construction everfound in the Maya area and the largest in the entire pre-Hispanichistory of the region’. Aguada Fénix is by no means an outlier.Massive architectural features, implying communal labour on thescale of ancient Egyptian pyramids, have now been found atnumerous sites in the Maya lowlands, many centuries before theinception of Classic Maya kingship. Mostly these comprise notpyramids but earthen platforms of staggering proportions andhorizontal extent, carefully laid out in roughly E-shapedformations; their function remains unclear, as most of these siteswere revealed by remote sensing (using LiDAR technology) andare yet to be excavated on any scale. 


21. Anthony 2007. 
22.
 Much of this research (published exclusively in Russian) wascutting-edge by the standards of the time, including aerialphotography, subsurface prospection and careful excavation. Forsummaries and descriptions in English see Videiko 1996; Menottiand Korvin-Piotrovskiy 2012. 

23.
 Shumilovskikh, Novenko and Giesecke 2017. What distinguishesthese soils, in physical terms, is their high humus content and 


capacity for storing moisture. 24. 
Anthony 2007: 160–74. 
25.
 To get a sense of relative scale, consider that just this vacantcentre of a mega-site alone could have contained a large Neolithictown such as Çatalhöyük more than twice over. 

26.
 Scientiﬁc dating shows that some of the largest known mega-sites were contemporaneous; Müller et al. 2016: 167–8. 

27.
 Ohlrau et al. 2016; Shumilovskikh, Novenko and Giesecke 2017. 

28.
 Nebbia et al. (2018) present evidence in support of this extremeseasonal model, while leaving room for other possibilities. 

29.
 The people of the mega-sites had a tradition of deliberatelyburning their houses, which complicates matters for modernanalysts, trying to ascertain how much of each site was in usesimultaneously. It’s not known why this burning was done (forritual purposes, or hygiene, or both?). Did it take place routinelywithin settlements, so part of the mega-site was living andgrowing, with the other part lingering on as a sort of ‘house.cemetery’? Ordinarily, careful modelling of high-precisionradiocarbon dates would allow archaeologists to resolve suchissues. Frustratingly, in this case, an anomaly in the calibrationcurve for the fourth millennium BC is preventing them from doing so. 

30.
 Kirleis and Dal Corso 2016. 

31.
 Chapman and Gaydarska 2003; Manzura 2005. 

32.
 One should also allow for different answers, varying from onemega-site to another. For example, some of them, such asMaidenetske and Nebelivka, mobilized their populations to digperimeter ditches, marking out a garden space between the outercircuit of houses and the edge of the settlement. Others, such asTaljanky, did not. It is worth stressing that these ditches cannotpossibly have functioned as fortiﬁcations or defences of any kind


– they were shallow, with frequent gaps so that people couldcome and go. It’s worth stressing this, because earlier scholarshipoften viewed the mega-sites as ‘refuge towns’ formed for thedefence of a local population, a view that has now been largely abandoned in the absence of any clear evidence for warfare orother forms of conﬂict (see Chapman 2010; Chapman, Gaydarskaand Hale 2016). 
33. Bailey 2010; Lazarovici 2010. 
34.
 As John Chapman and colleagues show, there is nothing in theseassembly houses to suggest they housed a political or religiousupper class: ‘Those expecting the architectural and artefactualreﬂections of a hierarchical society with elites ruling overthousands of inhabitants in the Trypillia mega-site will bedisappointed.’ (Chapman, Gaydarska and Hale 2016: 120). Asidefrom their scale, and sometimes an accentuated entranceway,these buildings are similar in their furnishings to ordinarydwellings, except for the interesting absence of installations forthe preparation and storage of food. They have ‘none of thedepositional characteristics of a ritual or administrative centre’(ibid.), and do not seem to have been permanently occupied onany scale, which supports the idea that they were used forperiodic, perhaps seasonal gatherings. 

35.
 Chapman, Gaydarska and Hale 2016. 

36.
 The Basque system of settlement organization is described byMarcia Ascher in Chapter Five of her book Mathematics Elsewhere (2004). We cannot do justice to the subtleties ofAscher’s account here or the mathematical insight she brings, andrefer interested readers to her study and to the originalethnographic material she relies on (Ott 1981). 


37. Ascher 2004: 130. 
38.
 As one of their leading excavators, the prehistorian JohannesMüller (2016: 304) puts it: ‘The new and unique character ofspatial organization in Late Trypillia [or ‘Tripolye’] mega-sitesdisplays some insights into human and group behaviour whichmight still be relevant for us today. Both the ability of non-literatesocieties to agglomerate in huge population groups under ruralconditions of production, distribution, and consumption and theirability to avoid unnecessary social pyramids and instead practicea more public structure of decision making, reminds us of ourown possibilities and abilities.’ 

39. 

Heartland of Cities was the title of a landmark archaeologicalsurvey and analysis of the central Mesopotamian ﬂoodplain byRobert McCormick Adams (1981). 

40.
 The marshes of southern Iraq are home to the Ma‘d.n(sometimes called Marsh Arabs), best known to Europeansthrough the writings of Wilfred Thesiger. The marshes weresystematically drained by Saddam Hussein’s Ba’ath governmentin an act of political retribution, leading to the mass displacementof the indigenous population, and enormous damage to thisancient habitat. Since 2003 there have been sustained and partially successful efforts to reconstitute the marshes and theirancestral communities and ways of life. 

41.
 Oates et al. 2007. Key evidence is in Syria, where militaryconﬂict has interrupted archaeological work at sites like TellBrak, on the Khabur River (a major tributary of the Euphrates).Archaeologists call these grasslands in northern Mesopotamia the‘dry-farming’ zone, because agriculture based on rainfall waspossible there. The contrast is with southern Mesopotamia, anarid zone, where irrigation from the major rivers was mandatoryfor cereal-farming. 

42. 

These mounds are the great material accretions of human life anddeath known by the Arabic word tell, built up through successivefoundation and collapse of mud-brick architecture over tens oroften hundreds of generations. 

43.
 For a survey of ‘the Sumerian world’ see Crawford (ed.) 2013. 

44.
 This also ﬁtted rather well with British colonial concerns in the modern region they called ‘Mesopotamia’ which were based on apolicy of elevating (and occasionally creating) local monarchiesfavourable to their own interests (see Cannadine 2001). 

45.
 See Dalley 2000. 

46.
 Wengrow 2010: 131–6; Steinkeller 2015. Scribes sometimesused another word (bala) – meaning ‘term’ or ‘cycle’ – to refer tocorvée labour and also the succession of royal dynasties, but thisis a later development. It is interesting to compare the wholephenomenon with the Malagasy fanompoana or ‘service’, a 


theoretically unlimited labour duty owed to the monarchy; in thiscase the monarch’s own family was exempt, but there are similaraccounts of the absolute equality of everyone who came togetherto dig earth on royal projects and the cheerful enthusiasm withwhich they did so (Graeber 2007a: 265–7). 
47. Steinkeller 2015: 149–50. 
48.
 Written evidence from various periods of Mesopotamian historyshows that rulers quite routinely proclaimed debt amnesties onjubilees and other festive occasions, wiping the slate clean fortheir subjects and allowing them to resume a productive civic life.Redemption of accrued debts, either by royal proclamation or in‘years of forgiveness’, made good ﬁscal sense. It was amechanism for restoring balance to the economy ofMesopotamian cities, and by releasing debtors and their kin fromservitude it allowed them to continue living productive civic lives(see Graeber 2011; Hudson 2018). 

49.
 Women were citizens and owned land. Some of the earliest stone monuments from anywhere in Mesopotamia record transactionsbetween male and female owners, who appear as legal parties onan equal footing. Women also held high rank in temples, andfemale royals trained as scribes. If their husbands fell into debtthey could become acting heads of households. Women alsoformed the backbone of Mesopotamia’s proliﬁc textile industry,which ﬁnanced its foreign trade ventures. They worked in templesor other large institutions, often under the supervision of otherwomen, who received land allotments in similar proportions tomen. Some women were independent ﬁnancial operators, issuingcredit to other women; see, in general, Zagarell 1986; van deMieroop 1989; Wright 2007; Asher-Greve 2012. Some of theearliest documentation on these matters comes from Girsu, in thecity-state of Lagash, around the middle of the third millennium BC. It comprises some 1,800 cuneiform texts derived mostly froman institution named ‘the House of the Woman’ and later called ‘the House of the Goddess Baba’, for which see Karahashi 2016. 

50.
 Chattel slavery, the keeping of slaves as property in privatehouseholds, was so deeply rooted in the economy and society of 


classical Greece that many feel justiﬁed in deﬁning Greek citiesas ‘slave societies’. We ﬁnd no obvious equivalent to this inancient Mesopotamia. Temples and palaces held prisoners of warand debt defaulters as slaves or semi-free workers, whoperformed manual tasks such as grain-grinding or porterage allyear round for food rations and owned no land of their own. Eventhen, they formed only a minority of the workforce in the publicsector. Outright chattel slavery also existed, but played nocomparably central role in the Mesopotamian economy; see Gelb1973; Powell (ed.) 1987; Steinkeller and Hudson (eds) 2015:
passim. 
51. Jacobsen 1943; see also Postgate 1992: 80–81. 52. Barjamovic 2004: 50 n.7. 
53. Fleming 2004. 
54. As John Wills (1970) noted long ago, something of the conductof assemblies is likely preserved in the speeches ascribed to godsand goddesses in Mesopotamian myth. The deities too convene tosit in assemblies, where they exhibit skills of rhetoric, persuasivespeech, logical argumentation and occasional sophistry. 
55. Barjamovic 2004: 52. 
56.
 One such ‘urban village’, as Nicholas Postgate (1992: 81–2)terms it, is documented in a tablet recovered from the city ofEshnunna in the Diyala valley, which lists Amorites ‘living in thecity’ according to their wards, designated by the names of malefamily heads and their sons. 

57.
 See e.g. Van de Mieroop 1999, especially p. 123. 58. Ibid. 160–61. 


59. Stone and Zimansky 1995: 123. 60. Fleming 2009: 1–2. 
61.
 Fleming (2009: 197–9) notes the ‘tradition [at Urkesh] of apowerful collective balance to leadership by kings may be theinheritance of a long urban history’, and that the council of elderscannot possibly be construed as part of the king’s own circle ofadvisors. It was rather an ‘entirely independent political force’ of 

some antiquity, a collective form of urban leadership, which‘cannot be regarded as a minor player in a primarily monarchicframework’. 

62. 

To reconstruct early urban political systems in Mesopotamia,Jacobsen relied especially on the story of ‘Gilgamesh and Agga’,a brief epic composition about the war between Uruk and Kish,which describes a city council divided into two chambers. 

63.
 Hence population estimates for the fourth millennium BC city arebased almost entirely on topographical surveys and distributionsof surface ﬁnds (see Nissen 2002). 

64.
 Nissen, Damerow and Englund 1993. 

65.
 Englund 1998: 32–41; Nissen 2002. A signiﬁcant number of themonumental structures on the Eanna complex are spectacularlyenlarged versions of a common household type (the so-called‘tripartite house’ form) which is ubiquitous in villages of thepreceding ‘Ubaid period of the ﬁfth millennium BC. Specialistsdebate whether some of these buildings might have been privatepalaces rather than temples, but in fact they don’t resemble laterpalaces or temples very much. In essence, they are up-scaledversions of traditional house forms, where meetings of largenumbers of people probably took place in the idiom of anextended family under the patronage of a deity-in-residence(Wengrow 1998; Ur 2014). The ﬁrst compelling examples ofpalace architecture in cities of the southern Mesopotamianalluvium come only centuries later, in the Early Dynastic period(Moorey 1964). 

66.
 See Crüsemann et al. (eds) 2019 for a magniﬁcent survey ofUruk’s architectural development over the ages; although we notethat their interpretation plays down those aspects of urbanplanning we would see as clearly relating to civic participation(especially with regard to the early phases of the Eanna sanctuarythey tend to assume, even in the absence of written evidence, thatany sort of grand architectural project must necessarily have beenintended to establish the exclusivity of a ruling elite). 

67.
 Among them are early copies of the so-called ‘Titles andProfessions List’, which was widely reproduced in later times and 

includes (among other things) terms for various kinds of judges,mayors, priests, chairs of ‘the assembly’, ambassadors,messengers, overseers of ﬂocks, groves, ﬁelds and farmingequipment, and also of potting and metalworking. Nissen,Damerow and Englund (1993: 110–11) review the immensedifﬁculties of extracting any kind of social history from suchdocuments, which depends on ﬁnding corroborations betweenparticular terms and their recurrence in functional administrativetexts of the same period, and even then is somewhat tendentious. 

68.
 Though we should also note that, at least by Old Babyloniantimes (c.2000–1500 BC), much scribal instruction also went on inprivate households. 


69. 
Englund 1988. 
70.
 Bartash 2015. There is a possibility some were already slaves orwar captives at this time (Englund 2009), and as we’ll see, thisbecomes much more commonplace later; indeed, it is possiblethat what was originally a charitable organization graduallytransformed as captives were added to the mix. For thedemographic composition of the temple workforce in the Urukperiod see also Liverani 1998. 

71.
 Another aspect of quality control in urban temples was the use ofcylinder seals. These tiny, near-indestructible carved stones areour main source of knowledge for about 3,000 years of image-making in the Middle East, from the time of the ﬁrst cities to thePersian Empire (c.3500–500 BC). They had many functions, andwere not simply ‘art objects’. In fact, cylinder seals were amongthe earliest devices for mechanically reproducing compleximages, done by rolling the seal on to a strip or block of clay tomake raised ﬁgures and signs appear, so they stand at thebeginning of print media. They were impressed on inscribed claytablets, but also marked clay stoppers of jars containing food anddrink. In this way, tiny images of people, animals, monsters, godsand so on were made to guard and authorize the contents, whichdistinguished the otherwise standard products of temple and laterpalace workshops and guaranteed their authenticity as they passedamong unknown parties (see Wengrow 2008). 

72.
 Some Assyriologists once believed this sphere encompassedalmost everything: that the ﬁrst Mesopotamian cities were‘temple states’ governed on the basis of ‘theocratic socialism’.This thesis has been convincingly refuted; see Foster 1981. Wedon’t really know what economic life was like outside the areaadministered by the temples; we just know that the templesadministered a certain portion of the economy, but not all, andthat they had nothing like political sovereignty. 

73.
 On the Uruk Vase the ﬁgure of the goddess, probably Inanna, islarger than the males who march towards her. The only exceptionis the ﬁgure who approaches her directly, at the head of theparade, which is mostly lost due to a break in the vessel but ismost likely the same standard male ﬁgure that appears on cylinderseals and other monuments of the time with his characteristic beard, hair gathered into a chignon, and long woven garments. Itis impossible to tell what status this male ﬁgure refers to, or if itwas occupied on a hereditary or rotating basis. The goddess wearsa long robe, which almost completely disguises the contours ofher body, while the smaller male ﬁgures appear nude, andarguably sexualised (Wengrow 1998: 792; Bahrani 2002). 

74.
 See Yoffee 1995; Van de Mieroop 2013: 283–4. 

75. 

See Algaze 1993. There is no hint of these colonies in theadministrative correspondence of the mother-city (and writingwas hardly used in the colonies themselves). 

76.
 In essence, these were the sacred origins of what we now callcommodity branding; see Wengrow 2008. 

77.
 See Frangipane 2012. 


78. Helwig 2012. 
79. Frangipane 2006; Hassett and Sa.lamtimur 2018. 80. Treherne 1995: 129. 
81.
 Among the more remarkable ﬁnds from the Early Bronze Agecemetery at Ba.ur Höyük in eastern Anatolia is an early set ofsculpted gaming pieces. 

82.
 Largely as predicted, in fact, by Andrew Sherratt (1996); and seealso Wengrow 2011. Where urban and upland societiesconverged, a third element emerged which resembles neither thetribal aristocracies nor the more egalitarian cities. Archaeologistsknow this other element as the Kura-Araxes or Transcaucasian culture, but it has proved hard to deﬁne in terms of settlementtypes, which vary widely within it. For archaeologists, whatidentiﬁes the Transcaucasian culture above all is its highlyburnished pottery, which achieved a remarkable distributionextending south from the Caucasus as far as the Jordan valley.Over such considerable distances, methods for making potteryand other distinctive craft products stayed remarkably constant,suggesting to some the migration of artisans, and perhaps evenwhole communities, to settle in remote locations. Such diasporagroups seem to have been widely involved in the circulation andworking of metals, especially copper. They carried with themcertain other distinctive practices such as the use of portablecooking hobs, sometimes decorated with faces, which supportedlidded pots used to prepare a cuisine based on stews andcasseroles: a somewhat eccentric practice in regions whereroasting and baking food in ﬁxed ovens was an age-old practicegoing back to Neolithic times (see Wilkinson 2014, with furtherreferences). 

83.
 Recent work attributes the eventual decline of the Indus civilization to changes in the ﬂood regime of the major riversystems, prompted by alterations in the monsoon cycle. This ismost evident in the drying-up of the Ghaggar-Hakra, once a majorcourse of the Indus, and a shift of human settlement to moreeasily watered areas where the Indus meets the rivers of Punjab,or to parts of the Indo-Gangetic plain which still fell within thecatchment of the monsoon belt; Giosan et al. 2012. 

84. 

For a review of the debates see Green (2020), who develops anargument that the Indus civilization was a case of egalitariancities, but along rather different lines to our own. 

85.
 For general overviews of the Indus civilization, and furtherdescription of the major sites, see Kenoyer 1998; Possehl 2002; 

Ratnagar 2016. 

86.
 For an overview of the Indus valley’s far-ﬂung commercial andcultural contacts in the Bronze Age see Ratnagar 2004; Wright2010. 

87.
 For the Indus script in general see Possehl 1996; for theDholavira street-sign, Subramanian 2010; and for the function ofIndus seals, Frenez 2018. 

88.
 See Jansen 1993. 89. Wright 2010: 107–10. 


90.
 See Rissman 1988. 

91.
 Kenoyer 1992; H. M.-L. Miller 2000; Vidale 2000. 

92.
 ‘The Indus Civilization is something of a faceless socioculturalsystem. Individuals, even prominent ones, do not readily emergefrom the archaeological record, as they do in Mesopotamia andDynastic Egypt, for example. There are no clear signs of kingshipin the form of sculpture or palaces. There is no evidence for astate bureaucracy or the other trappings of “stateness”.’ (Possehl2002: 6) 

93.
 Daniel Miller’s (1985) perceptive discussion of these pointsremains important. 

94.
 As discussed by, among others, Lamberg-Karlovsky 1999. It issometimes objected that viewing the Bronze Age civilization ofthe Indus valley through the lens of caste means painting anartiﬁcially ‘timeless’ picture of South Asian societies, and thusslipping into ‘orientalist’ tropes, because the earliest writtenmention of the caste system and its basic social distinctions or varnas occurs only around a millennium later, in the hymns of theRig Veda. In many ways, it’s a puzzling – and to some extent self-defeating – objection, because it only makes sense if one assumesthat a social system based on caste principles cannot itself evolve,in the same way that, say, class or feudal systems undergoimportant structural transformations over time. There are,certainly, those who have explicitly taken this position (mostfamously, Dumont 1972). Obviously, however, that is not theposition we are taking here; nor do we see any continuity in this 

context between caste, language and racial identity (another falseequation, which has hampered these kinds of discussions in thepast). 

95.
 On this point see Vidale’s important (2010) reassessment ofMohenjo-daro and its archaeological record. 

96. 

The general scarcity of weapons from Harappan sites remainsstriking; but as Corke (2005) points out, in other Bronze Agecivilizations (e.g. Egypt, China, Mesopotamia) weaponry tends tobe found in burials rather than settlements; so – he reasons – thevisibility of weapons and warfare in the Indus valley may begreatly reduced by an overall lack of funerary remains. As he alsopoints out, though, there is no evidence that weapons were usedas symbols of authority (by contrast with Mesopotamia, forinstance) or in any way formed ‘a signiﬁcant part of elite identity’in the Indus civilization. What is deﬁnitely absent is thegloriﬁcation of weapons and the kind of people who employthem. 

97.
 Obviously, it’s partly just the desire to preserve the credit forhaving ‘invented’ democracy for something called ‘the West’.Part of the explanation might also lie in the fact that academiaitself is organized in an extremely hierarchical fashion, and mostscholars therefore have little or no experience of makingdemocratic decisions themselves, and ﬁnd it hard to imagineanyone else doing so as a result. 

98.
 Gombrich 1988: 49–50, 110 ff. See also Muhlenberg and Paine1996: 35–6. 

99.
 As with all such cases, just about everything on the topic of earlyIndian ‘democracy’ is contested. The earliest literary sources, theVedas, assume a society that’s entirely rural, and that monarchy isthe only possible form of government – though some Indianscholars detect traces of earlier democratic institutions (Sharma1968); however, by the time of Buddha in the ﬁfth century BC the Ganges valley was home to a host of city-states, small republicsand confederations, many of which (the gana-sangha) appear tohave been governed by assemblies made up of all male membersof the warrior caste. Greek travellers like Megasthenes were 

perfectly willing to describe them as democracies, since Greekdemocracies were basically the same thing, but contemporaryscholars debate how democratic they really were. The entirediscussion seems to be premised on the assumption that‘democracy’ was some sort of remarkable historicalbreakthrough, rather than a habit of self-governance that wouldhave been available in any historical period (see, for example,Sharan 1983; Thapar 1984; our thanks to Matthew Milligan forguiding us to relevant source material, although he bears noresponsibility for the use we’ve made of it). 

100.
 On the seka principle see Geertz and Geertz 1978; Warren 1993. 


101. Lansing 1991. 
102.
 As argued in Wengrow 2015. 

103.
 Possehl 2002: passim; Vidale 2010. 

104. 

Independent cities were only entirely abolished in Europe in theseventeenth and eighteenth centuries, as part of the creation of themodern nation state. European empires, and the creation of themodern interstate system in the twentieth century, succeeded inwiping out any traces of them in other parts of the world. 


105. Bagley 1999. 
106.
 Steinke and Ching 2014. 

107.
 Interestingly, some of the smallest are in Henan itself, theheartland of the later named dynasties. The town ofWangchenggang, associated with the Xia Dynasty – the semi-legendary precursor to the Shang – has a total walled area ofaround thirty hectares; see Liu and Chen 2012: 222. 

108.
 Ibid.: passim; Renfrew and Liu 2018. 

109.
 Some scholars initially suggested that the Longshan period wasan age of high shamanism, an appeal to the later myth of Pan Gu,who prised heaven and earth apart in such a way that only thosewith spiritual powers could journey between them. Others at ﬁrstrelated it to classical legends of wan guo, the period of TenThousand States, before power was localized to the Xia, Shangand Zhou dynasties; see Chang 1999. 

110.
 Jaang et al. 2018. 


111. He 2013: 269. 
112. Ibid. 
113. He 2018. 
9. HIDING IN PLAIN SIGHT 
1.
 The precise location of Aztlán is unknown. Various lines ofevidence suggest that populations speaking Nahuatl (the languageof the Mexica/Aztec) were dispersed among both urban and ruralsettings before their southward migration. Most likely they werepresent, alongside a range of other ethnic and linguistic groups, inthe Toltec capital of Tula, which lies north of the Basin of Mexico(Smith 1984). 

2.
 So-called for the founding political union of three city-states:Tenochtitlan, Texcoco and Tlacopan. 

3.
 Mexica kings claimed partial descent from the Toltec rulers of acity called Culhuacan, where they sojourned in the course of theirmigrations, whence the ethnonym Culhua-Mexica; see Sahlins2017. 


4. Stuart 2000. 5. See Taube 1986; 1992. 
6.
 Published estimates range as high as 200,000 and drop down toas low as 75,000 people (Millon 1976: 212), but the mostthorough reconstruction to date (by Smith et al. 2019) rounds offat 100,000 and relates to the Xolalpan-Metepec phases of thecity’s occupation, between c.AD 350 and 600. At that time, muchof the population – both rich and poor – lived in ﬁne masonryapartment blocks, as we’ll go on to discuss. 

7.
 In fact, it’s quite likely some form of writing system was used atTeotihuacan, but all we can see of it are isolated signs, or smallgroups, repeated on wall paintings and pots where they captionhuman ﬁgures. Perhaps one day they will yield answers to someof the burning questions about the society that built Teotihuacan,but for the moment they remain largely inscrutable. Scholars can’t 

even tell yet, with any degree of conﬁdence, if the signs nameindividuals or groups, or perhaps places of origin; for recent andsometimes contradictory discussions see Taube 2000; Headrick2007; Domenici 2018. It is quite possible, of course, that theresidents of Teotihuacan produced more extensive inscriptions onmedia that have not survived, such as the ephemeral reed or barkpaper (amatl) later used by Aztec scribes. 

8.
 Other immigrants came to Teotihuacan from as far as Veracruzand Oaxaca, forming their own residential quarters and nurturingtheir traditional crafts. We should probably imagine at least someof the city’s many districts as so many ‘Chiapas-towns’,‘Yucatán-towns’, and so on; see Manzanilla 2015. 

9.
 For the cosmological and political signiﬁcance of ball-courts inClassic Maya cities see Miller and Houston 1987. 

10.
 See Taube 1986. 

11.
 It is worth noting, in passing, that rather similar arguments weremade by the archaeologist and art historian Henri Frankfort(1948; 1951) with regard to the emergence of Egypt andMesopotamia as parallel, but in some ways opposite, types ofcivilization; see also Wengrow 2010. 

12.
 Pasztory 1988: 50; and see also Pasztory 1992; 1997. 

13.
 Millon 1976; 1988: 112; see also Cowgill 1997: 155–6; and formore recent arguments, on similar lines, see Froese, Gershensonand Manzanilla 2014. 


14. Sharer 2003; Ashmore 2015. 
15.
 See Stuart 2000; Braswell (ed.) 2003; Martin 2001; and for therecent and unprecedented discovery of Maya wall paintings atTeotihuacan see Sugiyama et al. 2019. 

16.
 For Captain Cook as Lono see Sahlins 1985. Hernan Cortésattempted something similar in 1519 after some interpreted himas the second coming of Quetzalcoatl, the once and future king ofthe Aztecs, though most contemporary historians have concludedhe and Moctezuma were really playing a game where none tookthe attribution particularly seriously. For other examples, and the 

general phenomenon of ‘stranger-kings’, see also Sahlins 2008;Graeber and Sahlins 2017. 

17.
 Based on chemical analysis of human remains from an adultmale found in the Hunal Tomb at Copan, which suggest an originfor its occupant – identiﬁed as the dynastic founder K’inich YaxK’uk Mo’ – in the central Petén region (Buikstra et al. 2004). 

18.
 Cf. Cowgill 2013. Some later conquistadors played a similar role,such as the notorious Nuño Beltrán de Guzmán (c.1490–1558),who started his career in the Spanish court as a bodyguard ofCharles V before going on to found cities in northwest Mexico,where he ruled as founder-tyrant. 

19.
 Parallels with the ﬁfth century AD seem striking, but again noscholarly consensus exists on how to interpret the evidenceconnecting these two Tollans of Chichén Itzá and Tula (seeKowalski and Kristan-Graham 2017). 


20. Millon 1964. 
21.
 Plunket and Uruñuela 2005; see also Nichols 2016. 

22.
 Froese, Gershenson and Manzanilla 2014. 

23.
 Carballo et al. (2019: 109) note that domestic architecture fromthis early phase of Teotihuacan’s expansion is very poorlyunderstood. Such traces as have been found suggest irregular andunimposing dwellings, erected on posts rather than stonefoundations. See also Smith et al. 2017. 

24.
 See Manzanilla 2017. 

25.
 Arguably, the whole affair has a strong millenarian ﬂavour whenset against the backdrop of mass displacements and the loss offormer homes to natural disasters; cf. Paulinyi 1981: 334. 

26.
 Pasztory 1997: 73–138; and for more up-to-date accounts of thevarious construction phases, with associated radiocarbondeterminations, see S. Sugiyama and Castro 2007; N. Sugiyamaet al. 2013. 

27.
 Sugiyama 2005. And for detailed studies of humans remains andtheir origins see also White, Price and Longstaffe 2007; White etal. 2002. 


28. Cowgill 1997: 155. 29. See Cowgill 2015: 145–6. 
30.
 Sugiyama and Castro 2007. Froese et al. (2014: 3) note that thePyramids of the Sun and Moon may have been considered as‘large-scale public goods on a continuum with the constructionsof large-scale housing for most of the population’. 

31.
 Carballo et al. 2019; cf. Smith et al. 2017. 

32.
 Pasztory (1992: 287) observed, ‘No other common people inMesoamerican history lived in such houses’, though as we shallsee, the case of social housing at Teotihuacan is not as isolated asonce thought. 


33. 
See Manzanilla 1993; 1996. 34. Millon 1976: 215. 
35. Manzanilla 1993. 
36.
 Froese et al. 2014: 4–5; cf. Headrick 2007: 105–6, ﬁg. 6.3;Arnauld, Manzanilla and Smith (eds) 2012. A signiﬁcant numberof these larger three-temple complexes lie at various points alongthe Way of the Dead, while others are distributed among theresidential zones of the city. 

37.
 Giveaways include dizzying colour contrasts, fractalarrangements of organic forms that merge into one another, andintense geometrical patterning, bordering on kaleidoscopic. 

38.
 Most famously, in the murals from the apartment compounds ofTepantitla district, which also show ball games played in opencivic spaces rather than courts (as we discuss further in ChapterTen). See Uriarte 2006; and also Froese et al. 2014: 9–10. 


39.
 Isolated elements of glyphic writing may complicate this picture,designating speciﬁc groups or individuals, although on whatcriteria exactly is still unknown; Domenici 2018. 


40. Manzanilla 2015. 
41.
 Domenici (2018: 50–51), drawing on the work of RichardBlanton (1998; Blanton et al. 1996), proposes a plausiblesequence of developments whereby tensions grew between civicresponsibilities and the interests of largely self-governing 

neighbourhoods. Some form of privatization is envisaged,undermining the collective ethos or ‘corporate ideology’ of earliertimes. 

42.
 As pointed out by the historian Zoltán Paulinyi (1981: 315–16). 43. Mann 2005: 124. 


44. For an important but still quite isolated exception see the works
by Lane F. Fargher and colleagues cited below. 45. Cortés 1928 [1520]: 51. 
46. For which, see Isaac 1983. 47. Crosby 1986; Diamond 1997. 
48.
 In sixteenth-century Mexican city-states (or altepetl), these urbanwards called calpolli enjoyed considerable autonomy. Calpolliwere ideally organized into symmetrical sets, with reciprocalrights and duties. The city as a whole worked on the basis of eachcalpolli taking its turn to fulﬁl the obligations of municipalgovernment, rendering its share of tribute, workers for corvéeservice and personnel to staff the higher ranks of political ofﬁce,including – in the case of royal cities – the ofﬁce of tlatoani (king, or literally ‘speaker’). Special land allotments often wentalong with ofﬁcial roles, to support the incumbent administrator,and had to be surrendered at the end of a term. This opened uppositions of authority to those who lacked hereditary estates.Calpolli also existed outside cities – in rural settlements and small towns – where they may have corresponded more closely toextended kin units; within cities they were often deﬁnedadministratively by their shared responsibilities for deliveringtithes, taxes and corvée, but also sometimes along ethnic oroccupational lines, or in terms of shared religious duties, or evenorigin myths. Rather like the English term ‘neighbourhood’,calpolli seems to have become a nebulous concept in the modernscholarly literature, potentially covering an enormous variety ofsocial forms and units; see Lockhart 1985; Fargher et al. 2010;Smith 2012: 135–6 and passim. 

49.
 For the literary context of Cervantes de Salazar’s writings onNew Spain see González González 2014; and also Fargher, 


Heredia Espinoza and Blanton 2010: 236, with further references. 50. Nuttall 1921: 67. 
51. Ibid. 88–9. 
52.
 If any of this seems somewhat unlikely, we would ask the readerto consider that the 1585 manuscript of Diego Muñoz Camargo’sremarkable Historia de Tlaxcala, which in fact comprises threesections – one textual, in Spanish, and two pictographic, inSpanish and Náhuatl – effectively vanished from sight for aroundtwo centuries and was not registered at all in the comprehensivesurvey of Mesoamerican manuscripts undertaken in 1975. Iteventually resurfaced in a collection bequeathed to the Universityof Glasgow by Dr William Hunter in the eighteenth century, and afacsimile edition was produced only in 1981. 

53.
 Courtesy of Biblioteca Virtual Universal, Buenos Aires, thereader can ﬁnd a digital edition of Cervantes de Salazar’s text,Crónica de la Nueva España, at:

http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/obra-visor/cronica-de-la-nueva.
espana--0/html/ 


54.
 Xicotencatl the Younger, or Xicotencatl Axayacatl, was initiallycast as a traitor in both Spanish colonial and Tlaxcaltecaaccounts; according to Ross Hassig (2001) his rehabilitation andreputation as an indigenous ﬁghter against the Spanish only tookplace after Mexico declared independence. 

55.
 We paraphrase here from the Spanish. We are not aware of anyauthorized translation of these words into English. Incidentally,Xicotencatl the Elder was quite right about all this: it didn’t takelong after the conquest of Tenochtitlan for Tlaxcala to lose itsprivileges and exemptions with the Spanish Crown, reducing itspopulace to just another source of tribute. 

56. 

Hassig (2001: 30–32) provides a summary of the standardaccount, drawing mainly on Bernal Díaz del Castillo; he alsoconsiders possible factors behind the Spanish execution ofXicotencatl the Younger, who died by hanging at the age of thirty-seven. 

57.
 The possibility that Kandiaronk, whom the Jesuits considered torank among the smartest people that ever lived, might himselfhave learned about some of Lucian’s best lines in his conversations with the French, been impressed, and deployedvariations of them in later debate is one that seems utterlyinconceivable to such scholars. 

58.
 See Lockhart, Berdan and Anderson 1986; and for Nahuatltraditions of direct speech and political rhetoric, also Lockhart1985: 474. 

59.
 MacLachlan (1991: xii and n.12) is fairly typical in this regardwhen commenting on the ‘remarkable adjustment’ of Tlaxcaltecamembers of the council to (supposedly) European mores, whichhe attributes almost entirely to native self-interest underconditions of imperial domination. 

60.
 For a useful discussion of shifting scholarly opinion on suchmatters, Lockhart (1985) remains valuable. 

61.
 As, for instance, with academic responses to the so-called‘Inﬂuence Debate’, which we touch on in a later chapter,triggered by the proposal that Haudenosaunee federal structures(the Six Nations of the Iroquois) might have been one model forthe US Constitution. 

62.
 Motolinía 1914 [1541]: 227. Even if we can’t always establishdirect links between the surviving texts of de Salazar, Motoliníaand other chroniclers, it seems safe to assume that by the 1540sthere would have been any number of bilingual Nahuatl andSpanish speakers in large centres like Tlaxcala, exchangingstories about the deeds and sayings of their notable recentancestors. 

63.
 Gibson 1952; and see also Fargher, Heredia Espinoza andBlanton 2010: 238–9. 

64.
 On Chichimec see also Sahlins 2017, with further references. 65. Balsera 2008. 


66. Fargher et al. 2011. 
10. WHY THE STATE HAS NO ORIGIN 
1. 

Lévi-Strauss (1987) referred to Northwest Coast societies as‘house’ societies, that is, ones where kinship was organizedaround noble households, which were precisely the holders oftitles and heirloom treasures (as well as slaves, and the loyalty ofretainers). This arrangement seems typical of heroic societiesmore generally; the palace at Arslantepe, which we described inChapter Eight, is most likely just a more elaborate version of thesame thing. There is a direct line from here to what Weber called‘patrimonial’ and ‘prebendal’ forms of governance, where entirekingdoms or even empires are imagined as extensions of a singleroyal household. 

2. 

This again is easy to observe in activist groups, or any groupself-consciously trying to maintain equality between members. Inthe absence of formal powers, informal cliques that gaindisproportionate power almost invariably do so throughprivileged access to one or another form of information. If self-conscious efforts are made to pre-empt this, and make sureeveryone has equal access to important information, then all that’sleft is individual charisma. 

3. 

This deﬁnition held sway for a long time in Europe. It is whymedieval England could begin holding elections to selectparliamentary representatives as far back as the thirteenthcentury; but it never occurred to anyone that this had somethingto do with ‘democracy’ (a term which, at the time, was held innear-total disrepute). It was only much more recently, in the latenineteenth century, when men like Tom Paine came up with theidea of ‘representative democracy’ that the right to weigh in onspectacular competitions among the political elite came to be seenas the essence of political freedom, rather than its antithesis. 

4. 

Deﬁnitions that ignore sovereignty have little currency. Onecould argue, hypothetically, that the essence of ‘statehood’ is asystem of governance with at least three tiers of administrativehierarchy, staffed by professional bureaucrats. But by thatdeﬁnition we would have to deﬁne the European Union,UNESCO and the IMF as ‘states’, and this would be silly. They 

are not states by any common deﬁnition, precisely because theylack sovereignty and make no claim to it. 

5. 

Which is not, of course, to say that they didn’t make grandioseclaims to territorial sovereignty; just that careful analysis of theancient written and archaeological sources shows these claims tobe generally hollow; see Richardson 2012. 

6. 

On ‘Early Bronze Age urbanism and its periphery’ in westernEurasia see also Sherratt 1997: 457–70; and more generally,Scott’s (2017: 219–56) reﬂections on ‘The golden age of thebarbarians’. 

7. 

This pattern much resembles Weber’s famous notion of ‘theroutinization of charisma’, where the vision of a ‘religiousvirtuoso’, whose charismatic quality was based explicitly onpresenting a total break with traditional ideas and practices, isgradually bureaucratized in subsequent generations. Weber arguedthat this was the key to understanding the internal dynamics ofreligious change. 

8. 

Nash 1978: 356, citing Soustelle (1962), citing Bernardino deSahagún’s Historia general de las cosas de Nueva España. 

9. 

Dodds Pennock (2017: 152–3) discusses a revealing episode in1427, when Aztec visitors to a Tepanec banquet were made todress as women on the orders of the Maxtla (the Tepanec ruler) inorder to humiliate both them and their own ruler, who had of latefailed to avenge the rape of Aztec women by Tepanec in themarket at Coyoacan; things came full circle two years later, whenAztec armies entered Atzcapotzalco and sacriﬁced Maxtla to thegods. 

10. 

As reported, for example, in the memoirs of Bernal Díaz (inMaudslay’s translation), see among others the section onComplaints of Montezuma’s tyranny: ‘but they [the local chiefs]said that Montezuma’s tax gatherers carried off their wives anddaughters if they were handsome and ravished them, and this theydid throughout the land where the Totonac language was spoken.’See also Townsend 2006; Gómez-Cano 2010: 156. 

11. 

Dodds Pennock (2008) situates the public practice of religiousviolence within broader Aztec notions of gender, vitality andsacriﬁce; and see also Clendinnen 1991. 


12. 
See Wolf 1999: 133–96; Smith 2012. 
13. 
For general overviews of the Inca Empire and its archaeological
remains see Morris and van Hagen 2011; D’Altroy 2015. 14. 
Murra 1982. 
15. 
Ayllu, as we will discuss again later in the chapter, were land.holding groups, bound by ties of descent that cut acrosshouseholds. Their original function was to manage theredistribution of labour within, and sometimes between, villages,so no household was left to fend for itself. The kind of tasks usually taken on by ayllu corporations were routinely necessary,but fell beyond the capacity of a typical nuclear household: suchthings as clearing ﬁelds, harvesting crops, managing canals andreservoirs, porterage or ﬁxing bridges and other buildings.Importantly, the ayllu organization also acted as a support systemfor families who found themselves unable to obtain the basic material requirements of lifecycle rituals – chicha for funerals,houses for newly married couples and so on. See Murra 1956;Godoy 1986; Salomon 2004. 
16. 
Gose 1996; 2016. 
17. 
See Kolata 1992; 1997. 
18. 

Silverblatt 1987; and cf. Gose 2000. 

19. 

Urton and Brezine 2005. 


20. 
Hyland 2016. 
21. 
Hyland 2017. 
22. 
Clendinnen 1987. 
23. 

Maya writings from the early colonial period, such as the booksof Chilam Balam, almost invariably treat the Spanish not as theactual government but as irritating interlopers, and rival factionsof Maya nobility – engaged in ongoing struggles for inﬂuencethat the supposed conquerors appear to have been entirely 

unaware of – as still constituting the real government (Edmonson1982). 

24. 

Just how much else remains to be discovered is highlighted bynew (LiDAR) techniques for mapping tropical landscapes, whichrecently led experts to triple their estimates for the Classic Mayapopulation; see Canuto et al. 2018. 

25. 

See Martin and Grube 2000; Martin 2020. 

26. 

For a tentative reconstruction of how Maya rulership evolved outof earlier forms of shamanic power see Freidel and Schele 1988. 

27. 

In the absence of deﬁnitive evidence, theories of collapse havetended to follow the political concerns of their day. During theCold War, many Euro-American Mayanists seemed to assumesome kind of class conﬂict or peasant revolution; since the 1990sthere has been more of a tendency to focus on ecological crises ofone sort or another as the main causal factor. 

28. 

Ringle 2004; see also Lincoln 1994. These reconstructionsremain hotly debated (see Braswell (ed.) 2012), but if broadlycorrect, even in outline, they would correspond to what Graeberand Sahlins (2017) describe as a shift from ‘divine’ to ‘sacred’forms of kingship, or even ‘adverse sacralisation’. 


29. 
Kowaleski 2003. 
30. 
And for K’iche parallels see Frauke Sachse: ‘The MartialDynasties – the Postclassic in the Maya Highlands’, in Grube etal. (eds) 2001: 356–71. 
31. 
Kubler 1962. 
32. 

Kroeber (1944: 761) began his grand conclusion as follows: ‘Isee no evidence of any true law in the phenomena dealt with;nothing cyclical, regularly repetitive, or necessary. There isnothing to show either that every culture must develop patternswithin which a ﬂorescence of quality is possible, or that, havingonce so ﬂowered, it must wither without chance of revival.’Neither did he ﬁnd any necessary relation between culturalachievement and systems of government. 

33. 

In continental Europe, there’s an entire category of scholarshipknown as ‘proto-history’ which describes the study of peopleslike the Scythians, Thracians or Celts, who brieﬂy break into thelight of history through the writings of Greek or Romancolonizers, only to ﬁzzle back out again when the literate gazeturns elsewhere. 

34. 

In their additional cultic role as the ‘god’s hand’ the wives ofAmun – such as Amenirdis I and Shepenupet II – were alsoobliged to assist the male creator-god in acts of cosmicmasturbation; so, in ritual terms, she was as subordinate to a maleprincipal as one could possibly imagine, while in reality running agood portion of Upper Egypt’s economy and calling politicalshots at court. Judging by the grand locations of their funerarychapels at Karnak and Medinet Habu, the combination made forsome very effective realpolitik. 

35. 

See John Taylor’s chapter on ‘The Third Intermediate Period’ in


Shaw (ed.) 2000: 330–69, especially 360–62; also Ayad 2009. 36. 
Schneider 2008: 184. 
37. 

In The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt (Shaw ed. 2000), forinstance, the relevant chapter is called ‘Middle KingdomRenaissance (c.2055–1650 BC).’ 

38. 

For a useful summary see Pool 2007. 

39. 

Rosenwig 2017. Again, this picture is liable to change quitedramatically with the application of LiDAR survey techniques inthe provinces of Tabasco and Veracruz, which is already underway at the time of writing. 

40. 

See Rosenwig 2010. 

41. 

Attention to individual differences and personal aesthetics is alsoevident in a second major category of Olmec sculpture, mostabundantly documented at San Lorenzo. It depicts human ﬁgureswith unusual or anomalous features, including images ofhunchbacks, dwarfs, lepers and possibly also images based onpeople’s observations of miscarried embryos; see Tate 2012. 

42. 

See Drucker 1981; Clark 1997; Hill and Clark 2001. 

43. 

See Miller and Houston 1987. 

44. 

Hill and Clark 2001. It’s of more than passing interest, in thiscontext, that Teotihuacan – governed on more collectiveprinciples than Olmec, Maya or Aztec cities – had no such arenafor the ofﬁcial staging of ball games. Excluding a public ball-court from the municipal plan must surely have been a deliberatechoice, since many of Teotihuacan’s occupants would have beenfamiliar with such spectacles, and as we saw in Chapter Nine,nearly everything else in the city centre was laid out with exactingforesight and precision. When ball games do appear atTeotihuacan, it’s in a different context. So very different, that onebegins to suspect some conscious inversion of ideas that werecanonical in the surrounding kingdoms of Oaxaca and the Mayalowlands (recalling that people moved regularly between theseregions and were familiar with the practices of their neighbours). 


The evidence comes from domestic wall paintings in one ofTeotihuacan’s well-appointed housing estates, known asTepantitla. Gods are depicted, but also the earliest known imagesof people playing ball games with their feet, hands and sticks –something on the lines of soccer, basketball and hockey (seeUriarte 2006). All this was in violation of aristocratic norms. Thescenes have a street setting, with large numbers of participants allshown at the same scale. Associated with these scenes is a recurrent symbolism of water lilies, a powerful hallucinogen.Perhaps what we are seeing here is something peculiar toTeotihuacan; or perhaps we are glimpsing something of the gamesplayed by ordinary folk throughout Mesoamerica, a side of lifethat is largely invisible to us in more stratiﬁed polities. 
45. 
Clendinnen 1991: 144. 
46. 

In this respect, Wilk’s (2004) stimulating comparison betweenthe dynamics of the Olmec horizon and the cultural/politicalimpact of modern beauty pageants, such as Miss World and MissUniverse, seems very apposite. Geertz coined the phrase ‘theatrestate’ (1980) to describe Balinese kingdoms, where, he suggested,the entire apparatus of tribute basically existed for the purpose oforganizing spectacular rituals, rather than the other way round. 

His argument has some notable weaknesses – especially as seenfrom the perspective of Balinese women – but the analogy maystill be helpful, especially when one considers the original role ofthose famous Balinese cock ﬁghts (familiar to any ﬁrst-yearanthropology student); they were initially promoted and staged byroyal courts as a way of putting people into debt, which notinfrequently led to one’s wife and children being handed over tothe palace for use as slaves or concubines, or for onward saleabroad (Graeber 2011: 157–8, 413 n.88). 

47. 

As we saw in Chapter Eight. 


48. 

See Conklin and Quilter (eds) 2008. 

49. 

See Isbell 2008. 

50. 

See Quilter 2002; Castillo Butters 2005. 

51. 

Cf. Weismantel 2013. 

52. 

These are precisely the sort of highly complex images studied bythe anthropologist Carlo Severi (2015) in his classic analysis ofthe ‘chimera principle’. 

53. 

Burger 2011; Torres 2008. The stone carvings at Chavín deHuántar seem mostly concerned with making permanent whatwere inherently ephemeral experiences of altered states ofconsciousness. Animal motifs typical of Chavín art – such asfelines, snakes and crested eagles – actually occur up to 1,000years earlier on cotton textiles and in beadwork, which alreadycirculated widely between the highlands and the coast.Interestingly, more fully preserved textiles from later periodsshow that, even at the height of Chavín’s power, coastal societieswere approaching their deities in explicitly female forms (Burger1993). At Chavín de Huántar itself, women appear to be absentfrom the surviving repertory of ﬁgural sculpture. 


54. 
Rick 2017. 
55. 

See Burger 2008. 

56. 

See Weismantel 2013. 

57. 

For a more detailed discussion of the divine kingship of theNatchez, with full references, see Graeber’s chapter ‘Notes on the 

Politics of Divine Kingship’, in Graeber and Sahlins 2017: 390–98. 

58. 

Cited in Graeber, ibid. p. 394. 


59. 
Lorenz 1997. 
60. 

See Gerth and Wright Mills (eds) 1946: pp. 233–4. 

61. 

Brown 1990: 3, quoting John Swanton’s Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast of the Gulf ofMexico (1911) (Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 43). 

62. 

For a good summary of such royal ‘exploits’ see de Heusch1982; the king most famous for gunning down his own subjectswas the Ganda King Mutesa, who was trying to impress DavidLivingstone after the latter presented him with the gift of a riﬂe,but it’s by no means a unique event: see Simonse 1992; 2005. 

63. 

Graeber and Sahlins 2017: 129. 64. 
Crazzolara 1951: 139. 


65. 

Reported in Diedrich Westermann’s Shilluk People: theirLanguage and Folklore (1911). Philadelphia: Board of ForeignMissions of the United Presbyterian Church of North America, p.175. 

66. 

Graeber and Sahlins 2017: 96, 100–101, 130. 

67. 

We will be considering such possibilities further in the nextchapter. 

68. 

Actually, we are being disingenuous here. This is not just athought experiment: the remains of the Great Village – nowknown to archaeologists as the Fatherland Site, in Adams County


– were in fact excavated, notably by Stu Neitzel in a fewintermitted seasons of ﬁeldwork, during the 1960s and early1970s. In the centuries since its abandonment, what was left ofthe site had been covered by up to ten feet of colluvial muddeposited by the St Catherine Creek, which ﬁrst had to beremoved with heavy machinery (bulldozers), playing havoc withthe archaeological remains below and obliterating key evidence.What Neitzel (1965; 1972) reported accords in broad outline withwhat we have just described; no doubt, more careful and modern 
techniques could do a lot better in terms of archaeologicalreconstruction (cf. Brown 1990). 
69. 

In fact, early excavations in the vicinity of Mound C, the likelylocation of the Natchez temple, did turn up more than twentyburials with grave goods including objects of French as well aslocal manufacture; but their excavation was poorly conducted,with no systematic documentation, and they likely date to thevery ﬁnal period of temple use, just before the building was razed,and when the power of the Great Sun was no doubt already muchdiminished (see Brown 1990: 3; Neitzel 1965, reporting ﬁndsmade by Moreau B. C. Chambers in 1930). 

70. 

Egyptologists refer to the First and Second Dynasties as Egypt’s‘Early Dynastic’ period while the ‘Old Kingdom’ – somewhatconfusingly – begins only in the Third Dynasty. 

71. 

See Dickson 2006; Morris 2007; Campbell (ed.) 2014; Graeberand Sahlins 2017: 443–4, with further references. 

72. 

For the latter possibility, and a review of earlier interpretations,see Moorey (1977); but for an alternative view, which sees themas true royal burials, see Marchesi 2004. 


73. 
Campbell 2014. 
74. 

Cf. Campbell 2009. 

75. 

Although perhaps not the only tombs, since Egypt’s earliestrulers may occasionally have split their ancestors’ bodies up,burying them in more than one location to distribute theirmortuary cult as widely as possible; see Wengrow 1996: 226–8. 

76. 

Wengrow 1996: 245–58; Bestock 2008; see also Morris 2007;2014. 

77. 

Macy Roth 2002. 

78. 

Maurice Bloch (2008) has observed, in a similar vein, that earlystates almost invariably involve an explosion of spectacular andoften apparently random violence, and that the ﬁnal result of suchstates is to ‘disorganize’ the ritual life of ordinary households in away that, somehow, can never be put back to how it was even if 

those states collapse. It’s from this dilemma, he argues, that thephenomenon of universalizing religion emerges. 

79. 

One effect of this was to create a series of ‘no-man’s-lands’ around Egypt’s territorial borders. For example, the politicalseparation of Egypt from once closely related lands and peoplesin Sudan seems to have involved the depopulation of territorieson Egypt’s newly established southern boundary, and thedismantling of a former apparatus of chieﬂy power within Nubia:the so-called A-Group, as archaeologists call it. This took place inan act of violent domination, commemorated in a rock carving atGebel Sheikh Suleiman on the Second Cataract. So, in effect, wehave a kind of symmetry between extremes of ritual killing at thecentre of the new Egyptian polity (on the occasion of a ruler’sdemise) and the foundational violence taking place, orcommemorated, on its territorial frontiers; Baines 2003; Wengrow2006: passim. 

80. 

For which see Lehner 2015. 

81. 

Wengrow et al. 2014. 

82. 

Jones et al. 2014. Neolithic burials were usually located in thearid margins of the Nile valley (areas dry enough to afford acertain amount of natural preservation for the corpse), andsometimes further into adjacent desert lands; they seem not tohave had any sort of durable superstructures, but were often laidout in large cemeteries, and other lines of evidence show thatpeople remembered, revisited and reused the same locations overa period of generations; see Wengrow 2006: 41–71; Wengrow etal. 2014. 

83. 

Indeed, Egyptologists had long noted certain elements of laterkingship showing up in art far ‘too early’ – for instance, thefamous Red Crown of Lower Egypt appears on a piece of potterydated almost 1,000 years before the Red and White Crowns werecombined to become an ofﬁcial symbol of Egyptian unity; thestandard motif of a king wielding a mace to smite his foes cropsup in a painted tomb at Hierakonpolis, 500 years before theNarmer Palette, and so on. See Baines 1995 for further examplesand references. 

84. 

Recent Nilotic peoples have tended to be strictly patrilineal; this,actually, does not entirely exclude women from taking onprominent positions, but generally they do so by playing the partof men. Among the Nuer, for instance, a ‘bull’ or village leaderwith no male heir can simply declare his daughter a man, and shemight well take over his position, even marry a woman and berecognized as father of her children. It’s probably no coincidencethat in Egyptian history as well, women who took on dominantpositions often did so by declaring themselves, effectively, males(a notable exception to this being the god’s wives of Amun,whom we discussed earlier in this chapter). 

85. 

See Wengrow 2006: Chapters One, Four and Five; Kemp 2006;Teeter (ed.) 2011. Population estimates for these ‘proto.kingdoms’ remain highly speculative due to the inaccessibility ofancient living quarters and the burial of large areas of prehistoricsettlement beneath modern ﬁeld systems and ﬂoodplains. 


86. 
See Friedman 2008; 2011. 
87. 
See Wengrow 2006: 92–8. 
88. 
Ibid.: 142–6. 
89. 
Integration of large-scale chicha consumption into lifecyclerituals was not actually an Inca innovation – it traces back to theexpansion of Tiwanaku, midway between Chavín (with its verydifferent ritual comestibles) and the Inca; see Goldstein 2003. 
90. 
See Murra 1956: 20–37. 
91. 
Wengrow 2006: 95, 160–63, 239–45, with further references. 
92. 
Lehner 2015. 
93. 

See also Roth 1991. 

94. 

Symbolic and likely also practical associations betweenmonumental architecture and the activities of ships’ crews arealso suggested for the later Bronze Age stone temples of Byblos(Jbeil) in Lebanon, a port town with close trading and culturallinks to Egypt (see Wengrow 2010b: 156); and ethnographicdescriptions of how team-skills transfer from boat-handling to themanipulation of heavy stone-work can be found, for instance, in 

John Layard’s classic ethnography of a Melanesian island, Stone Men of Malekula (1942). London: Chatto and Windus. 

95. 

The production line analogy is inspired by Lewis Mumford onthe ‘megamachine’, where he famously argued that the ﬁrstcomplex machines were in fact made of people. The‘rationalization’ of labour typical of the factory system was, asscholars like Eric Williams long ago suggested, really pioneeredon slave plantations in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,but others have recently pointed out that ships around that time,both merchant and military, seem to have been another majorzone of experimentation, since being on board such vessels wasone of the few circumstances where large numbers of people wereassigned tasks entirely under a single overseer’s command. 

96. 

As pointed out by feminist theorists (e.g. Noddings 1984). 

97. 

It is worth recalling here that in the tombs of some of Egypt’shighest-ranking ofﬁcials, during the Old Kingdom, we ﬁndamong their most important titles not just military, bureaucraticand religious ofﬁces but also duties such as ‘BelovedAcquaintance of the King’, ‘Overseer of the Palace Manicurists’,and so on (Strudwick 1985) 


98. 
Compare Baines 1997; 2003; Kolata 1997. 
99. 

For the different forms of Egyptian and Mesopotamian kingshipsee Frankfort 1948; Wengrow 2010a; for rare exceptions to thispattern, in which Mesopotamian kings appear to have claimeddivine or near-divine status, see the contributions by PiotrMichalowski and Irene Winter in Brisch (ed.) 2008, both stressingthe exceptional and ambivalent nature of such claims. 

100. 

This situation persisted even in later Mesopotamian history:when Hammurabi erected a stela with his famous law code in the eighteenth century BC, this might have seemed the quintessentialsovereign act, decreeing how violence could and could not beused within the king’s territories, creating a new order out ofnothing; but in fact most of these grand edicts appear never tohave been systematically enforced. Babylonian subjects continuedto use the same complex patchwork of traditional legal codes andpractices they had before. Moreover, as the decorative scheme of 

the stela makes clear, Hammurabi is acting on the authority of thesun-god Shamash; see Yoffee 2005: 104–12. 

101. 

And here we can draw a further contrast with Mesopotamia,where administration was an established feature of earthlygovernment, but the cosmos – far from being predictablyorganized – was inhabited by gods whose actions (like those ofthe biblical Yahweh) often came in the form of unexpectedinterventions, and frequently chaotic ruptures in human affairs;Jacobsen 1976. 

102. 

Other examples of regimes where sovereignty and competitivepolitics dominated the earthly sphere, and administrativehierarchies were projected on to the universe, might include manySouth Asian societies, which exhibit a similar fascination withcosmic cycles, and medieval Europe, where the Church and itsimage of angelic hierarchies seems to have preserved a memoryof the old legal-bureaucratic order of ancient Rome. 

103. 

Martin and Grube 2000: 20; Martin 2020. 

104. 

See Bagley 1999. 


105. 
Shaughnessy 1989. 
106. 

Appeal to divination is limited in Egypt before the NewKingdom, and had an ambivalent role in Inca systems ofgovernment. As Gose (1996: 2) explains, in the Inca case oracularperformances were actually at odds with the personal authority ofliving kings. They centred instead on the mummiﬁed bodies ofroyal ancestors or their statue equivalents, which provided one ofthe few venues for expressing subaltern (and potentiallysubversive) views, in a manner that did not challenge theassumption of the ruler’s absolute sovereignty and supremeauthority. In a similar way, in Renaissance times, to take a king orqueen’s horoscope was often considered to be an act of treason.Maya kings used bloodletting and stone-tossing as forms ofdivination, but they do not seem to have been of centralimportance to affairs of state. 

107. 

Yuan and Flad 2005. Outside the sphere of literacy, divinationwith animal parts was also widely practised. 

108. 

See Keightley 1999. 109. 
Shaughnessy 1999. 


110. 

Shang China might well be considered the paradigm for what theanthropologist Stanley Tambiah (1973) has described as ‘galacticpolities’, also the most common form in later Southeast Asianhistory, where sovereignty concentrated at the centre and thenattenuated outwards, focusing in some places, fading in others tothe point where, at the edges, certain rulers or nobles mightactually claim to be part of empires – even distant descendants ofthe founders of empires – whose current ruler had never heard ofthem. We can contrast this sort of outward proliferation ofsovereignty with another kind of macro-political pattern,emerging ﬁrst in the Middle East and then gradually across muchof Eurasia, where diametrically opposed notions of what actuallyconstitutes ‘government’ would face off against each other indynamic tension, creating the great frontier zones that separatedbureaucratic regimes (whether in China, India or Rome) from theheroic politics of nomadic peoples which threatened constantly tooverwhelm them; for which see Lattimore 1962; Scott 2017. 

111. 

The clearest illustration of this royal theme from the OldKingdom is to be found in the reliefs surviving from Sahure’smortuary temple at Abusir; see Baines 1997. 


112. 
Baines 1999. 
113. 

See Seidlmayer 1990; Moreno García 2014. 

114. 

Translation as per Seidlmayer 1990: 118–21. Especially striking,in this regard, are the nomarch’s claims to keep his people not justhealthy, but also provided with the basic necessities for a fullsocial life: the resources to sustain a family, conduct properfunerals, and the guarantee that one would not be cut loose fromone’s local moorings or condemned to live as a refugee. 

115. 

Dunbar 1996: 102; Diamond 2012: 11. This assumption isenshrined both in the kind of ‘scalar stress’ theories we discussed at the start of Chapter Eight, and also in a certain strand ofevolutionary psychology (see also Dunbar 2010), which arguesthat bureaucracy supplies the administrative solution to problems 

of information storage and management, arising when societiesscale up beyond a certain threshold of face-to-face interaction.Bureaucracy, according to such theories, acts as a kind of‘external symbolic storage’ when the innate capacities of thehuman mind for storing and recalling information (e.g. relating tothe ﬂow of commodities or labour) are overtaxed. So far as we areaware, there is absolutely no empirical evidence to support thishypothetical but deeply ingrained reconstruction of the ‘origins ofbureaucracy’. 

116. 

Interestingly, the archival records of the nineteenth-centuryMerina kingdom of Madagascar are much the same: the kingdomwas conceived in patrimonial terms as a royal household, andeach descent group’s true nature was deﬁned by the service theyperformed for the king, who was often imagined as a child, withthe people as his or her nursemaids. The records go into endlessand exact detail concerning every item that passed in and out ofthe royal household to maintain the ruler, but are otherwisealmost silent on economic affairs (see Graeber, ‘The People asNursemaids of the King,’ in Graeber and Sahlins 2017). 

117. 

Akkermans (ed.) 1996. 

118. 

See Schmandt-Besserat 1992. 

119. 

Oddly, very few such seals have been found at Tell Sabi Abyaditself, perhaps because they were made of materials that have notsurvived such as wood; miniature stamp seals made of stone, andof the kind we are referring to here, are quite ubiquitous on othernorthern Mesopotamian sites of the same (‘Late Neolithic’ or‘Halaf’) period. 

120. 

Akkermans and Verhoeven 1995; Wengrow 1996. 

121. 

The suggestion – sometimes voiced – that all this was a result ofpart of the population being absent from the village during theherding season, when they took their ﬂocks to graze on nearbyhillsides (a practice called transhumance), is probably much toosimplistic. It also doesn’t make a great deal of sense – there werestill the elderly, spouses, siblings and offspring left in the villageto look after property or report problems. 

122. 

See Wengrow 2010a: Chapter Four. 123. 
Wengrow 1998: 790–92; 2001. 


124. 
This is of course somewhat ironic, since archaeologists workingwithin older frameworks of social evolution had long assumedthat ‘Ubaid societies must have been organized into some sort of‘complex chiefdoms’, simply because they are chronologicallylocated between the earliest farming settlements and the earliestcities (which, in turn, are assumed to usher in the ‘the birth of thestate’). The logical circularity of such arguments will by now bevery obvious, as will their lack of ﬁt to the archaeologicalevidence for the periods in question. 
125. 
Murra 1956: 156. 
126. 

See, especially, Salomon 2004. It may be observed in passingthat market systems in medieval villages in England appear tohave worked in much the same way, though less formally: thevast majority of transactions were on credit, and every six monthsto a year a collective accounting was held in an effort to cancel alldebts and credits back to zero (Graeber 2011: 327). 

127. 

Salomon 2004: 269; Hyland 2016. It is possible that string-basedcounting techniques may also have been used in prehistoricMesopotamia, in conjunction with clay symbols and stamp seals,as demonstrated by evidence for the suspension of perforatedlumps of clay, shaped into regular forms and sometimes bearingimpressed signs or symbols (Wengrow 1998: 787). 

128. 

See Wernke 2006: 180–81, with further references. 

129. 

For the mode of organization and labour tribute schedules seeHyland 2016. 

130. 

John Victor Murra in his magisterial thesis on The Economic Organization of the Inca State (1956), cites Spanish sources whotell of local misanthropes and misﬁts elevated to new positions ofauthority; of neighbours turning against each other; and debtorsuprooted from their villages – though one can never be sure howmuch of this was a result of the conquista itself; see also Rowe1982. 

131. 

For which see Debt: The First 5000 Years, by one of the authors


of the present volume (Graeber 2011); and also Hudson 2018. 132. 
Von Dassow 2011: 208. 
133. 

Murra (1956: 228) concludes that the illusion of the Inca state associalistic derives from ‘ascribing to the state what was actually an ayllu function’. ‘Security for the incapacitated was providedby an age-old, pre-Incaic system of automatic access tocommunity assets and surpluses as well as reciprocal labourservices,’ he goes on: ‘There may have been some state relief inthe case of major frost and drought; the references to this are lateand very few compared to the hundreds that describe the use ofreserves for military, court, church and administrative purposes.’Probably, this is overstated, since the Inca also inheritedadministrative structures and an apparatus of social welfare fromsome of the kingdoms they conquered, so the reality must surelyhave varied from place to place (S. Rockefeller, personalcommunication). 

134. 

See, for example, Richardson (2012) on Mesopotamia, andSchrakamp (2010) on the seasonal dimensions of early dynasticmilitary organization; Tuerenhout (2002) on seasonal warfareamong the Classic Maya; and for further examples and discussionsee contributions to Neumann et al. (eds) (2014); Meller andScheﬁk (2015). 

135. 

James Scott (2017: 15) makes a similar observation at thebeginning of his book Against the Grain: ‘In a good part of theworld, the state, even when it was robust, was a seasonalinstitution. Until very recently, during the annual monsoons inSoutheast Asia, the state’s ability to project its power shrank backvirtually to its palace walls. Despite the state’s self-image and itscentrality in most standard histories, it is important to recognizethat for thousands of years after its ﬁrst appearance, it was not aconstant but a variable, and a very wobbly one at that in the life ofmuch of humanity.’ 

136. 

Buoyed, perhaps, by the illusion common to so many who claimarbitrary power, that the fact that you are able to kill your subjectsis somehow equivalent to having given them life. 

137. 

In a brilliant and under-appreciated book called Domination and the Arts of Resistance (1990), James Scott makes the point thatwhenever one group has overwhelming power over another, aswhen a community is divided between lords and serfs, mastersand slaves, high-caste and untouchable, both sides tend to end upacting as if they were conspiring to falsify the historical record.That is: there will always be an ‘ofﬁcial version’ of reality – say,that plantation owners are benevolent paternal ﬁgures who onlyhave the best interest of their slaves at heart – which no one,neither masters or slaves, actually believes, and which they arelikely to treat as self-evidently ridiculous when ‘offstage’ andspeaking only to each other, but which the dominant group insistssubordinates play along with, particularly at anything that mightbe considered a public event. In a way, this is the purestexpression of power: the ability to force the dominated to pretend,effectively, that two plus two is ﬁve. Or that the pharaoh is a god.As a result, the version of reality that tends to be preserved forhistory and posterity is precisely that ‘ofﬁcial transcript’. 


138. 
Abrams 1977. 
139. 

See also Wengrow 2010a. 

140. 

As pointed out, for example, by Mary Harris (1997); recall herealso that the centralized knowledge systems of Chavín, theClassic Maya and other pre-Columbian polities may well haverested on a continent-wide system of mathematics, originallycalculated with the aid of strings and cords, and hence groundedultimately in fabric technologies (Clark 2004); and that theinvention of cuneiform mathematics in cities was preceded bysome thousands of years of sophisticated weaving technologies invillages, echoes of which are preserved in the forms anddecoration of prehistoric ceramic traditions throughoutMesopotamia (Wengrow 2001). 


141. 
Renfrew 1972. 
142. 
A chronological scheme, widely used by archaeologists for theentire island, starts with the ‘Pre-palatial’, moving on to ‘Proto.palatial’, ‘Neo-palatial’ and so on. 
143. 
Whitelaw 2004. 
144. 

See Davis 1995. 

145. 

Preziosi and Hitchcock 1999. 

146. 

We should perhaps mention here Arthur Evans’s notoriousidentiﬁcation of a ‘priest-king’ among the painted ﬁgures heuncovered at Knossos at the turn of the twentieth century (forwhich see S. Sherratt 2000). In fact, the various bits of decoratedwall relief Evans used to piece this image together came fromdifferent archaeological strata, and probably never belonged to asingle ﬁgure (he himself thought this to begin with, but changedhis mind). Even the gender of the priest-king is now questionedby art historians. But the more basic question is why anybodywould want to seize on a single, possibly male ﬁgure with animpressive plumed hat as evidence for kingship, when theoverwhelming majority of Minoan pictorial art is pointing us inanother direction altogether. We will follow it in a moment. But inshort, the priest-king of Knossos is no better contender for athrone than his similarly named and similarly isolated counterpartat the earlier Bronze Age city of Mohenjo-daro in the Indusvalley, whom we encountered in Chapter Eight. 


147. 
Younger 2016. 
148. 

‘It is certain’, Evans wrote, ‘that, however much the maleelement had asserted itself in the domain of government by thegreat days of Minoan Civilization, the stamp of Religion stillcontinued to reﬂect the older matriarchal stage of socialdevelopment.’ (cited in Schoep 2018: 21) 

149. 

For a detailed discussion of early Egyptian imports to Crete, viaLebanon, and their likely association with women’s rituals seeWengrow 2010b. 


150. 
Voutsaki 1997. 
151. 

Palaces only called in tribute on certain speciﬁc goods – such asﬂax, wool and metals – which were converted into a still morespeciﬁc range of items in palace workshops, mainly ﬁne textiles,chariots, weapons and scented oils. Other major industries, suchas pottery manufacture, are entirely missing from theadministrative records. See Whitelaw 2001. 

152. 

See Bennett 2001; S. Sherratt 2001. 


153. 
Kilian 1988. 
154. 
Rehak 2002. 
155. 
Groenewegen-Frankfort 1951. 
11. FULL CIRCLE 
1.
 Uncultivated, quite literally, for as Montesquieu put it, perhapsmost succinctly: ‘These people enjoy great liberty; for as they donot cultivate the earth, they are not ﬁxed: they are wanderers andvagabonds …’ (Spirit of the Laws, 18: 14 – ‘Of the political Stateof the People who do not cultivate the Land’). 

2.
 Lovejoy and Boas 1965. 3. Scott 2017: 129–30. 4. Ibid.: 135. 


5. Ibid.: 253. 
6.
 Sahlins and Service 1960. 

7.
 The closest we have to a historical comparison is economic: theSocialist Bloc, which existed from roughly 1917 to 1991 and atits peak encompassed a fair amount of the world’s land mass andpopulation, is often treated as a (failed) experiment in this sense.But some would argue that it was never really independent fromthe larger capitalist world system, but simply a subdivision ofstate capitalism. 

8.
 We are drawing here on examples discussed at greater length inDebt: The First 5000 Years (Graeber 2011: Chapter Nine), whichdescribes these co-ordinated changes largely in terms of thealternation between physical (gold and silver) currency andvarious forms of abstract (intangible) credit money. 

9.
 For a general overview of Cahokia see Pauketat 2009. 10. Williams 1990. 


11.
 Severi (2015) discusses evidence for the use of pictographicwriting systems among the indigenous peoples of North America, 

and why their characterization as ‘oral’ societies is misleading in many ways. 

12. 

JR (1645–6) 30: 47; see also Delâge 1993: 74. 

13.
 Carr et al. 2008. 14. Knight 2001; 2006. 


15.
 Sherwood and Kidder 2011. 

16.
 ‘The Archaic measuring unit appears to have survived into theAdena period … but Woodland peoples employed a differentsystem of measurement and geometric forms … derived, at leastin part, from Formative Mesoamerica … The system used ashorter measuring cord (1.544 m) for the Standard Unit and itspermutations, but it otherwise preserved many of the traditionalcounts and arithmetic … Also, reliance on triangles was replacedby the use of square grids, and circles and squares, at variousSMU [Standard Macro Unit] increments, as is so evident inHopewell earthwork.’ (Clark 2004: 205, with further references) 


17. Yerkes 2005: 245. 
18.
 Specialists have come to refer to this as the Pax Hopewelliana;for a general review, as well some occasional exceptions in theform of trophy skulls, see Seeman 1988. 

19.
 See Carr and Case (eds) 2005; Case and Carr (eds) 2008: passim. 

20. 

Contemporary scholars list at least nine clans among the‘Tripartite Alliance’ of sodalities in the central Hopewell region:Bear, Canine, Feline, Raptor, Raccoon, Elk, Beaver, NonraptorialBird and Fox. These correspond roughly to the largest clansdocumented among Central Algonkian peoples who still inhabitthe region (Carr 2005; Thomas et al. 2005: 339–40). 

21.
 As one might imagine, this has been a matter of some debate, butwe follow here the extensively documented views put forward inCarr and Case (eds) 2005, with further detailed references. 

22.
 DeBoer 1997: 232: ‘I view Hopewell earthwork sites asceremonial centres, places where various activities, includingmortuary rituals and other activities such as feasts, causeway-directed foot races and other “games,” as well as dances and 

gambling were conducted periodically in the absence of largepermanent populations resident at the centres themselves.’ Onburial: Seeman 1979. 

23.
 See Coon (2009) on the north/south distinction; he also notes thatin the south, burials are mostly collective and undifferentiated,and treasures are buried apart from bodies, not identiﬁed withspeciﬁc individuals. The art shows ﬁgures in costume, dressed asmonsters, rather than individuals wearing headdresses as atHopewell. All this suggests a more self-consciously egalitarian,or at least anti-heroic, ideology in the south. On the pairing ofshamanic and earth shrine sites see DeBoer 1997; on gender andofﬁce see Field, Goldberg and Lee 2005; Rodrigues 2005. Carr(in Carr and Case 2005: 112) speculates that the north/southdivision might reﬂect a distinction between the ancestors of later,patrilineal Great Lakes Algonkians and the matrilinealSoutheastern societies (Cree, Cherokee, Choctaw, etc); but thepattern reﬂected in tombs seems far more radical: aside fromsome male mortuary priests, all major ofﬁce holders in the southappear to be women. Rodrigues’s (2005) analysis of skeletalremains suggests even more surprising differences in the south,where ‘women also participated in maintenance and subsistenceactivities more commonly done by Native American men,including ﬂint knapping and running possibly involved inhunting. Inversely, men shared in processing plant foods,stereotypically associated with women.’ (Carr, in Case and Carreds 2008: 248). It is rather surprising that these ﬁndings have notbeen more broadly discussed. 

24.
 On the causeway: Lepper 1997. 

25.
 As we discussed in Chapter Four, the monumental hunter-gatherer centre of Poverty Point on the Lower Mississippi drew inobjects and materials from a similarly wide region almost 2,000years earlier, and it may well have disseminated various forms ofintangible goods and knowledge far and wide in return; butPoverty Point had a different character to Hopewell, tightlyfocused on a single centre of gravity, and less clearly marked by 

the spread of social institutions such as burial rituals or settlementpatterns. 

26.
 Between 3500 and 3200 BC a cultural spread of similar scope, butvery different character, also preceded the emergence of the ﬁrstlarge territorial kingdom in Egypt; this is often referred to in theliterature as a ‘cultural uniﬁcation’ that preceded politicaluniﬁcation, although in fact much of that uniﬁcation between thevalley and delta of the Nile seems to have been conﬁned to thesphere of funerary rituals and their associated forms of personaldisplay (Wengrow 2006: 38, 89). 


27. Seeman 2004: 58–61. 
28. For a more detailed argument on these lines see Braun (1986). 29. DeBoer 1997. 
30.
 Hudson 1976: passim. Residents of New York City might beinterested to know that Broadway was originally an Indian road,and that Astor Place, where it begins, was the shared lacrosseﬁeld for the three nations that occupied Manhattan. 

31.
 On Rattlesnake Causeway and mound and the origins of Cahokiasee Baires 2014; 2015; on Cahokia’s beginnings as place ofpilgrimage, Skousen 2016. 

32.
 Chunkey appears to have been modelled on a popular children’sgame called Hoop and Pole. On the origins of chunkey and itslater role see DeBoer 1993; Pauketat 2009: Chapter Four. 

33.
 A later observer of the Choctaw recorded: ‘Their favorite gameof chunké … they play from morning till night, with anunwearied application, and they bet high; here you may see asavage come and bring all his skins, stake them and lose them;next his pipe, his beads, trinkets and ornaments; at last hisblankets and other garments, and even all their arms, and after allit is not uncommon for them to go home, borrow a gun and shootthemselves.’ (Romans, cited in Swanton 1931: 156–7). At thetime of European contact, such extreme sports seem to have actedas a levelling mechanism, since few stayed on top for long andeven those who sold themselves don’t seem to have remained that way for very long. 

34.
 Pauketat 2009: 20. The literature on Cahokia is vast. In addition to the general overviews we have already cited see also Alt 2018;Byers 2006; Emerson 1997a; Fowler 1997; Milner 1998; Pauketat1994; 2004; and essays in Emerson and Lewis 1991; Pauketat andEmerson (eds) 1997; for the environmental context, Benson et al.2009; Woods 2004. 

35. 

Emerson et al. 2018. 


36. Smith 1992: 17. 
37. Emerson 1997a; 1997b: 187; cf. Alt 2018. Pauketat et al. (2015:
446) refer to this as a process of ‘ruralization’. 
38.
 Betzenhauser and Pauketat 2019. As Emerson notes (1997b),between AD 1050 and 1200, surveillance was also extended intothe countryside through the establishment of what he terms ‘civicnodes’, which seem to have performed a mixture of ritual andmanagerial functions; see also Pauketat et al. 2015: 446–7. 

39.
 Originally identiﬁed as the central burial of two males, ﬂankedby retainers; but see now Emerson et al. 2016 for the truecomplexity of this deposit, which lies within the tumulus knownto archaeologists as Mound 72, some way south of the GreatPlaza. 

40.
 Fowler et al. 1999 reported the mass graves as all-female, but infact the picture is again more complex; see now Ambrose et al.2003; Thompson et al. 2015. 

41.
 Knight 1986; 1989; Knight et al. 2011; Pauketat 2009: ChapterFour; for other possible readings of the bird-man symbolism seeEmerson et al. 2016. 


42. Emerson 2007; 2012. 
43.
 The precise reasons behind Cahokia’s collapse are hotlycontested; for a range of views see Emerson and Headman 2014;Kelly 2008, with further references. 

44.
 See Cobb and Butler 2002. 

45.
 For a range of views on the latter issue, compare Holt 2009;Pauketat 2007; and see also Milner 1998. 

46.
 For which, at Cahokia, see Smith 1992; Pauketat 2013. 

47.
 Cf. Pauketat et al. 2015: 452. 

48.
 La Flesche 1921: 62–3; Rollings 1992: 28; Edwards 2010: 17. 

49.
 See King 2003. 

50.
 King 2003; 2004; 2007; Cobb and King 2005. 

51.
 In Clayton et al. (eds) 1993: 92–3. 

52.
 As argued in Ethridge 2010. 

53.
 Ibid.: 33–7, 74–7. The indigenous forms of republicangovernment that emerged in the Southeast during the eighteenthcentury also presumed a certain relationship with nature, but thiswas in no sense one of harmony. Ultimately, it was a relation ofwar. Plants were human allies and animals were enemies; killingprey without following correct ritual formula was a violation ofthe laws of war, which would cause animals to send disease intohuman communities by way of revenge. Yet at the same time thebusiness of hunting tended to be understood, especially by men,as representing a certain ideal of individual freedom. 


54. Ibid.: 82–3. 
55.
 The argument was put forward by Waskelov and Dumas butnever published; it’s cited and discussed in Ethridge (2010: 83–4)and Stern (2017: 33), though in our opinion it makes the wholecase backwards, seeing the ‘creation of new coalescentcommunities [and] … emergence of a more egalitarian,consensus-based social structure’ in the face of disasters caused by the European invasion, and only then the emergence of a newcosmology whose symbol was the looped square, representing thecouncil-ground as the universe, as a sort of adaptation to this‘new reality’. But how could self-conscious ideals ofegalitarianism have emerged and been adopted at all, exceptthrough some sort of cosmological expression? 

56.
 Fogelson 1984. There were, as Fogelson notes, and as we’ll soonsee, Cherokee priests in the seventeenth century, though theywere gradually replaced by individual curers. It’s hard not to seethe legend as to some degree reﬂecting real historical events:Etowah, for instance, was in what later became Cherokeeterritory. 

57.
 Coffee itself was ﬁrst cultivated either in Ethiopia or Yemen; theAmerican equivalent was called ‘the Black Drink’ and traces backto at least Hopewell times, when it was used in intense doses forritual purposes (Hudson 1979; Crown et al. 2012). On Creek dailygatherings: Hahn 2004; Fairbanks 1979. 

58.
 Brebeuf in JR 10: 219. 

59.
 Certainly, the emerging soft drug regime in Europe – which wasin many ways also the foundation of the emerging world economyof the time (founded, ﬁrst on the spice trade, then on the drug,arms and slave trades), was quite different, since it focused somuch on new regimes of work. While in the Middle Ages almosteveryone had consumed mild intoxicants like wine or beer on adaily basis, the new regime saw a division between mild drugsmeant to facilitate work – coffee and tea, especially used asvehicles for sugar, along with tobacco – and hard liquor for theweekends (see various contributions in Goodman, Lovejoy andSherratt eds 1995). 

60.
 In our terms, it’s not even clear that Adena-Hopewell was a ‘ﬁrst.order regime of domination’; in most respects, as we’ve indicated,it seems closer to the kind of grand hospitality zones, cultureareas, interaction spheres, or civilizations we’ve encountered somany times before in other parts of the world. 

61.
 See Kehoe (2007) for an extensive comparison of ethno.historical data on the Osage with Cahokian archaeology (also Hall1997). Their exact relationship with Cahokia is notarchaeologically clear, however, and Robert Cook (2017) suppliesthe most recent breakdown of their origins in Fort Ancient, aMississippianized region of central Ohio whose population seemsto have interacted with the Cahokian heartland (see especially, pp.141–2, 162–3). 

62.
 La Flesche 1930: 530; Rollings 1992: 29–30; Bailey and LaFlesche 1995: 60–62. 


63. La Flesche 1921: 51. 64. Rollings 1992: 38; Edwards 2010. 
65. La Flesche (1921: 48–9) writes: ‘In the course of this study of theOsage tribe, covering a number of years, it was learned fromsome of the older members of the Nohozhinga of the present daythat, aside from the formulated rites handed down by the men ofthe olden days who had delved into the mysteries of nature and oflife, stories also came down in traditional form telling of themanner in which these seers conducted their deliberations. The story that seemed most to impress the Nohozhinga of today is theone telling of how those men, those students of nature, graduallydrifted into an organized association that became known by the name Nohozhinga, Little-Old-Men. As time went on thisassociation found a home in the house of a man who had won, byhis kindness and hospitality, the affection of his people … Sincethat time it has been regarded by prominent men as an honor toentertain them.’ 
66. La Flesche 1939: 34. 
67.
 See above, n.1; and also Burns 2004: 37–8, 362. Burns himself isof partly Osage descent and was brought up as Osage. We ﬁnd itstriking how regularly indigenous authors are open to thepossibility that such dialogues were two-way, and how quicklyEuropean historians, or Americans of European descent, dismissany such suggestions as preposterous and effectively shut themdown. 

68.
 Parker 1916: 17; italics ours. It’s interesting to note that someearly sources, like Josiah Clark, refer to the later ﬁgure ofAdodharoh as ‘the king’, though alternatively as ‘principal civilaffairs ofﬁcer of the confederacy’ (in Henige 1999: 134–5). 

69.
 It is worthy of note here that Arthur Parker describes Iroquoiswitches of his day as essentially those who have the power to turnthemselves into monstrous beasts, and at the same time to bendothers to their will through telepathic commands (Parker 1912:27–8 n.2; cf. Smith 1888; Dennis 1993: 90–94; Shimony 1961:261–88; 1970; Tooker 1964: 117–20). Mann also emphasizes thepolitical nature of the designation: ‘the closest Iroquoian thoughtcomes to European witchcraft is a general disgust with anyonewho uses [charms] in an underhanded way, to trick another person 

into behaviour that is neither voluntary nor self-directed’ (Mann2000: 318; cf. Graeber 1996 for a similar case in Madagascar,also focusing on love magic). 

70.
 We are thinking here, particularly, of the arguments made byRobert Lowie and Pierre Clastres, discussed at various points inour earlier chapters. 

71.
 For instance, the Haudenosaunee also claimed they weredescended from a population of escaped serfs, subjugated by anumerically superior enemy whom they called the Adirondaks(‘Barkeaters’) (Holm 2002: 160). Subjugation and insurrectionwere in no sense entirely alien concepts here. 


72. Trigger 1990: 136–7. 
73. Ibid.: 137. 
74.
 Fremin in Wallace (1958: 235): ‘The Iroquois have, properlyspeaking, only a single Divinity – the dream. To it they rendertheir submission, and follow all its orders with the utmostexactness. The Tsonnontouens [Seneca] are more attached to thissuperstition than any of the others; their Religion in this respectbecomes even a matter of scruple; whatever it be that they thinkthey have done in their dreams, they believe themselvesabsolutely obliged to execute at the earliest moment. The othernations content themselves with observing those of their dreamswhich are the most important; but this people, which has thereputation of living more religiously than its neighbors, wouldthink itself guilty of a great crime if it failed in its observance of asingle dream. The people think only of that, they talk aboutnothing else, and all their cabins are ﬁlled with their dreams …Some have been known to go as far as Quebec, traveling ahundred and ﬁfty leagues, for the sake of getting a dog, that theyhad dreamed of buying there …’. Wallace argues that this is adirect psychological consequence of the stoicism and importanceof personal freedom and autonomy in Iroquoian societies. Seealso Blau 1963; Graeber 2001: 136–9. 

75.
 The earlier dates are in reference to an eclipse mentioned in thefoundation text (Mann and Fields 1997; cf. Henige 1999; Snow1991; Atkins 2002; Starna 2008). 

76.
 For the general state of archaeological understanding see Tuck1978; Bamann et al. 1992; Engelbrecht 2003; Birch 2015. On theOntario inception of maize cultivation: Johansen and Mann 2000:119–20. 

77.
 Mann and Fields 1997: 122–3; Johansen and Mann 2000: 278–9. 

78.
 See Chapter Six. 


79.
 Morgan 1851; Beauchamp 1907; Fenton 1949; 1998; Tooker1978; on the role of women speciﬁcally: Brown 1970; Tooker1984; Mann 1997; 1998; 2000. 


80. 
Jamieson 1992: 74. 
81. In Noble 1985: 133, cf. 1978: 161. There is some debate overhow seriously to take the missionary claims about Tsouharissen:Trigger (1985: 223) for instance insists he was simply anunusually prominent war chief, but the preponderance ofanthropological opinion seems weighted towards seeing theNeutral as a ‘simple chiefdom’. 
82. Noble 1985: 134–42. 83. Parker 1919: 16, 30–32. 84. Lahontan 1990 [1703]: 122–4. 
85. The story is told in some detail in Mann 2000: 146–52. 
12. CONCLUSION 
1.
 Sometimes he also used the phrase illud tempus; see, amongmany other works, Eliade 1959. 

2.
 Hocart 1954: 77; see also Hocart 1969 [1927]; 1970 [1936]. 

3.
 On reﬂection, many of what we consider to be quintessentialfreedoms – such as ‘freedom of speech’ or ‘the pursuit ofhappiness’ – are not really social freedoms at all. You can be free to say whatever you like, but if nobody cares or listens, it hardlymatters. Equally, you can be as happy as you like, but if thathappiness comes at the price of another’s misery, it hardlyamounts to much either. Arguably, the things often quoted asquintessential freedoms are based on the very illusion created by 

Rousseau in his second Discourse: the illusion of a human life that is solitary. 

4.
 For which see Graeber and Sahlins 2017: passim. 5. Harari 2014: 133. 6. Scarry 1985. 7. Kelly 2000. 


8. See Haas and Piscitelli 2013. 9. Patterson 1982. 
10.
 For further discussion see Graeber 2011: 198–201 and the sources cited there. 

11.
 One might imagine these public torments as wild or disorderly intheir conduct; but in fact the preparation of a prisoner for sacriﬁcewas one of the few occasions on which an ofﬁce holder mightissue commands for calm and orderly behaviour, as well asforbidding sexual intercourse. For all of the above see Trigger1976: 68–75. 

12.
 For a period of perhaps ﬁve centuries or more, human remainsacross the whole of Eastern North America display remarkablylittle evidence of traumatic injuries, scalping or other forms ofinterpersonal violence (Milner et al. 2013). Evidence forinterpersonal violence and warfare exists in both earlier and laterperiods, the most famous later examples being a mass graveexcavated at Crow Creek and an Oneota village cemetery withextensive evidence of trauma, both dating to around 700 yearsago. Such evidence accounts for perhaps a few decades or moreof social history – a century at most – and is fairly localized.There is absolutely no reason to believe that the entire regionsomehow existed in a Hobbesian state for millennia, ascontemporary theorists of violence blandly assume. 


13. Delâge 1993: 65–6. 
14.
 See Merrick 1991. 

15.
 In a (1995) article that has undoubtedly been inﬂuential, but stillnot nearly as inﬂuential as it deserves, Crumley pointed out theneed for alternatives to hierarchical models of social complexity 


in archaeological interpretation. As she noted, the archaeologicalrecord is full of evidence for the development of social andecological systems that were complex and highly structured, justnot according to hierarchical principles. ‘Heterarchy’ – theumbrella term she introduced for those other types of systems –was borrowed from cognitive science. Many of the societieswe’ve focused on in this book – from Upper Palaeolithicmammoth hunters to the shifting coalitions and confederacies ofsixteenth-century Iroquoia – could be described in these terms(had we chosen to adopt the language of systems theory), on thebasis that power was dispersed or distributed in ﬂexible waysacross different elements of society, or at different scales ofintegration, or indeed across different times of year within thesame society. 

Bibliography 
Abrams, Philip. 1977. ‘Notes on the difﬁculty of studying the State.’Journal of Historical Sociology 1 (1): 58–89.
Acemo.lu, Daron and James Robinson. 2009. ‘Foundations of societalinequality.’ Science 326: 678–9. 
Adams, Robert McCormick. 1981. Heartland of Cities: Surveys of AncientSettlement and Land Use on the Central Floodplain of the Euphrates.Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Akkermans, Peter M. M. G. (ed.). 1996. Tell Sabi Abyad: Late NeolithicSettlement. Report on the Excavations of the University of Amsterdam(1988) and the National Museum of Antiquities Leiden (1991–1993) inSyria. Istanbul: Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut teIstanbul. 
Akkermans, Peter M. M. G. and Mark Verhoeven. 1995. ‘An image ofcomplexity: the burnt village at Late Neolithic Sabi Abyad, Syria.’American Journal of Archaeology 99 (1): 5–32.
Albert, Bruce. 1989. ‘Yanomami “violence”: inclusive ﬁtness orethnographer’s representation?’ Current Anthropology 30 (5): 637–40.
Alfani, Guido and Roberta Frigeni. 2016. ‘Inequality (un)perceived: theemergence of a discourse on economic inequality from the Middle Agesto the age of Revolution.’ Journal of European Economic History 45 (1):21–66. 
Algaze, Guillermo. 1993. The Uruk World System: The Dynamics ofExpansion of Early Mesopotamian Civilization. Chicago: University ofChicago Press.
Allan, Peter. 1966. ‘Baron Lahontan.’ Master’s thesis, University of BritishColumbia. 
Allsen, Thomas T. 2016. The Royal Hunt in Eurasian History. Philadelphia:University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Alt, Susan. M. 2018. Cahokia’s Complexities. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press. 
Ambrose, Stanley H., Jane Buikstra and Harold W. Krueger (2003). ‘Statusand gender differences in diet at Mound 72, Cahokia, revealed byisotopic analysis of bone.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 22 (3): 217–26.
Ames, Kenneth M. 1995. ‘Chieﬂy power and household production on theNorthwest Coast.’ In T. Douglas Price and Gary M. Feinman (eds),Foundations of Social Inequality. New York: Plenum Press, pp. 155–87.
—. 2001. ‘Slaves, chiefs and labour on the northern Northwest Coast.’World Archaeology 33 (1): 1–17.
—. 2008. ‘Slavery, household production and demography on the southernNorthwest Coast: cables, tacking and ropewalks.’ In Catherine M.Cameron (ed.), Invisible Citizens: Captives and their Consequences. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, pp. 138–58.
Ames, Kenneth M. and Herbert D. G. Maschner. 1999. Peoples of theNorthwest Coast. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Anderson, Benedict. 1991. Imagined Communities: Reﬂections on theOrigin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso. 
Angelbeck, Bill and Colin Grier. 2012. ‘Anarchism and the archaeology ofanarchic societies: resistance to centralization in the Coast Salish Regionof the Paciﬁc Northwest Coast.’ Current Anthropology 53 (5): 547–87.
Anthony, David. W. 2007. The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: HowBronze-Age Riders from the Steppes Shaped the Modern World.Princeton, NJ and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
—. (ed.) 2010. The Lost World of Old Europe: the Danube Valley 5000– 3500 BC. Princeton, NJ and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Arbuckle, Benjamin S. 2013. ‘The late adoption of cattle and pig husbandryin Neolithic Central Turkey.’ Journal of Archaeological Science 40: 1805–15. 
Arbuckle, Benjamin S. and Cheryl Makarewicz. 2009. ‘The earlymanagement of cattle (Bos taurus) in Neolithic Central Anatolia.’Antiquity 83 (321): 669–86.
Arnauld, Charlotte M., Linda Manzanilla and Michael E. Smith (eds). 2012.The Neighborhood as a Social and Spatial Unit in Mesoamerican Cities. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Arnold, Jeanne E. 1995. ‘Transportation, innovation and social complexityamong maritime hunter-gatherer societies.’ American Anthropologist 97 (4): 733–47.
Arroyo-Kalin, Manuel. 2010. ‘The Amazonian Formative: cropdomestication and anthropogenic soils.’ Diversity 2: 473–504. 
Ascher, Marcia. 2004. Mathematics Elsewhere: An Exploration of Ideas Across Cultures. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Asher-Greve, Julia M. 2013. ‘Women and agency: a survey from Late Urukto the end of Ur III.’ In Crawford (ed.), pp. 359–77.
Ashmore, Wendy. 2015. ‘Contingent acts of remembrance: royal ancestorsof Classic Maya Copan and Quirigua.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 26: 213–31. 
Asouti, Eleni. 2006. ‘Beyond the Pre-Pottery Neolithic-B interactionsphere.’ Journal of World Prehistory 20: 87–126. 
Asouti, Eleni and Dorian Q. Fuller. 2013. ‘A contextual approach to theemergence of agriculture in Southwest Asia: reconstructing earlyNeolithic plant-food production.’ Current Anthropology 54 (3): 299–345.
Asouti, Eleni and Ceren Kabukcu. 2014. ‘Holocene semi-arid oakwoodlands in the Irano-Anatolian region of Southwest Asia: natural oranthropogenic?’ Quaternary Science Reviews 90: 158–82. 
Asouti, Eleni et al. 2015. ‘Early Holocene woodland vegetation and humanimpacts in the arid zone of the southern Levant.’ The Holocene 25 (10):1565–80. 
Atkins, Sandra Erin. 2002. ‘The Formation of the League of theHaudenosaunee (Iroquois): Interpreting the Archaeological Recordthrough the Oral Narrative Gayanashagowa.’ Master’s thesis, TrentUniversity.
Atran, Scott. 1986. ‘Hamula organisation and Masha’a tenure in Palestine.’Man (N.S.) 21 (2): 271–95.
Aubert, M. et al. 2014. ‘Pleistocene cave art from Sulawesi, Indonesia.’Nature 514: 223–7. 
—. 2018. ‘Palaeolithic cave art in Borneo.’ Nature 564: 254–7. 
—. 2019. ‘Earliest hunting scene in prehistoric art.’ Nature 576: 442–5. 
Ayad, Mariam F. 2009. God’s Wife, God’s Servant: The God’s Wife of Amun (c.740–525 BC). London and New York: Routledge.
Baden-Powell, Baden Henry. 1896. The Indian Village Community. London,New York, Bombay: Longmans, Green and Co. 
Bagley, Robert. 1999. ‘Shang archaeology.’ In Loewe and Shaughnessy(eds), pp. 124–231.
Bahrani, Zeinab. 2002. ‘Performativity and the image: narrative,representation and the Uruk vase.’ In E. Ehrenberg (ed.), Leaving NoStones Unturned: Essays on the Ancient Near East and Egypt in Honorof Donald P. Hansen. Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns, pp. 15–22.
Bailey, Douglass W. 2010. ‘The ﬁgurines of Old Europe.’ In Anthony (ed.),pp. 112–27.
—. 2017. ‘Southeast European Neolithic ﬁgurines: beyond context,interpretation, and meaning.’ In Insoll (ed.), pp. 823–50.
Bailey, Garrick and Francis La Flesche. 1995. The Osages and the InvisibleWorld. From the Works of Francis La Flesche. Norman and London: University of Oklahoma Press.
Bailey, Geoff N. and Nicky J. Milner. 2002. ‘Coastal hunter-gatherers andsocial evolution: marginal or central?’ In Before Farming: TheArchaeology of Old World Hunter-Gatherers 3–4 (1): 1–15.
Bailey, Geoff N. and Nicholas C. Flemming. 2008. ‘Archaeology of thecontinental shelf: marine resources, submerged landscapes andunderwater archaeology.’ Quaternary Science Reviews 27: 2153–65. 
Baines, John. 1995. ‘Origins of Egyptian kingship.’ In D. O’Connor and D.Silverman (eds), Ancient Egyptian Kingship. Leiden, New York and Cologne: Brill, pp. 95–156.
—. 1997. ‘Kingship before literature: the world of the king in the OldKingdom.’ In R. Gundlach and C. Raedler (eds), Selbstverständnis und Realität: Akten des Symposiums zur ägyptischen Königsideologie Mainz15–17.6.1995. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 125–86.
—. 1999. ‘Forerunners of narrative biographies.’ In A. Leahy and J. Tait(eds), Studies on Ancient Egypt in Honour of H.S. Smith. London: EgyptExploration Society, pp. 23–37.
—. 2003. ‘Early deﬁnitions of the Egyptian world and its surroundings.’ In
T. F. Potts, M. Roaf and D. Stein (eds), Culture through Objects: AncientNear Eastern Studies in Honour of P. R. S. Moorey. Oxford: Grifﬁth Institute, pp. 27–57.
Baires, Sarah E. 2014. ‘Cahokia’s Rattlesnake Causeway.’ Midcontinental Journal of Archaeology 39 (2): 145–62.—. 2015. ‘The role of water in the emergence of the pre-Columbian NativeAmerican City.’ Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews 2 (5): 489–503. 
Bakhtin, Mikhail M. (transl. H. Iswolsky). 1993 [1940]. Rabelais and His World. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Balsera, Viviana Díaz. 2008. ‘Celebrating the rise of a new sun: theTlaxcalans conquer Jerusalem in 1539.’ Estudios de cultura Náhuatl 39: 311–30. 
Bamann, Susan et al. 1992. ‘Iroquoian archaeology.’ Annual Review of Anthropology 21: 435–60. 
Bánffy, Eszter. 2017. ‘Neolithic Eastern and Central Europe.’ In Insoll (ed.),pp. 705–28.
Barber, Elizabeth. J. W. 1991. Prehistoric Textiles. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press. 
—. Women’s Work: The First 20,000 Years. New York: W. W. Norton. 
Barjamovic, Gojko. 2003. ‘Civic institutions and self-government inSouthern Mesopotamia in the mid-ﬁrst millennium BC.’ In J. G. Dercksen (ed.), Assyria and Beyond: Studies Presented to M. T. Larsen. Leiden,Istanbul: NINO, pp. 47–98.
Barruel, Abbé. 1799. Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism, vol.
3: The Anti-Social Conspiracy. New York: Isaac Collins. 
Barry, Herbert, Irvin. L. Child and Margaret. K. Bacon. 1959. ‘Relation ofchild training to subsistence economy.’ American Anthropologist 61: 51– 63. 
Bartash, Vitali. 2015. ‘Children in institutional households of Late Urukperiod Mesopotamia.’ Zeitschrift für Assyriologie 105 (2): 131–8.
Basile, Paola. 1997. ‘Lahontan et l’évolution moderne du mythe du “bonsavage”.’ Master’s thesis, McGill University.
Bateson, Gregory. 1935. ‘Culture Contact and Schismogenesis.’ Man 35: 178–83. 
—. 1936. Naven. A Survey of the Problems Suggested by a CompositePicture of the Culture of a New Guinea Tribe Drawn from Three Points of View. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bean, Lowell J. and Thomas C. Blackburn. 1976. Native Californians: A Theoretical Retrospective. Socorro, NM: Ballena Press.
Beauchamp, William M. 1907. Civil, Religious, and Mourning Councilsand Ceremonies of Adoption of the New York Indians. New York State Museum Bulletin 113. Albany, NY: New York State EducationDepartment. 
Beidelman, Thomas. O. 1971. ‘Nuer priests and prophets: charisma,authority and power among the Nuer.’ In T. O. Beidelman (ed.), The Translation of Culture: Essays to E.E. Evans-Pritchard. London: Tavistock, pp. 375–415.
Belcher, Ellen. 2014. ‘Embodiment of the Halaf: Sixth MillenniumFigurines in Northern Mesopotamia.’ PhD dissertation, ColumbiaUniversity, New York.
Bell, Ellen E., Marcello Canuto and Robert J. Sharer (eds). 2004.Understanding Early Classic Copan. Philadelphia: University ofPennsylvania Museum, pp. 191–212.
Bellwood, Peter. 2005. First Farmers: The Origins of AgriculturalSocieties. Malden, MA and Oxford: Blackwell.
Bellwood, Peter and Colin Renfrew (eds). 2002. Explaining theFarming/Language Dispersal Hypothesis. Cambridge: McDonaldInstitute for Archaeological Research.
Benedict, Ruth. 1934. Patterns of Culture. London: Routledge.
Bennett, John. 2001. ‘Agency and bureaucracy: thoughts on the nature andextent of administration in Bronze Age Pylos.’ In Voutsaki and Killen(eds), pp. 25–37.
Benson, Larry, Timothy R. Pauketat and Edwin Cook. 2009. ‘Cahokia’sboom and bust in the context of climate change.’ American Antiquity 74: 467–83. 
Berkhofer, Robert F. 1978a. ‘White conceptions of Indians.’ In William C.Sturtevant and Bruce G. Trigger (eds), Handbook of North American Indians, vol. 15: Northeast. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, pp. 522–47.
—. 1978b. The White Man’s Indian: Images of the American Indian fromColumbus to the Present. New York: Knopf.
Berrin, Kathleen (ed.). 1988. Feathered Serpents and Flowering Trees:Reconstructing the Murals of Teotihuacan. San Francisco: Fine Ars Museums of San Francisco. 
Berrin, Kathleen and Esther Pasztory (eds). 1993. Teotihuacan: Art from the City of the Gods. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Bestock, Laurel D. 2008. ‘The Early Dynastic funerary enclosures ofAbydos.’ Archéo-Nil 18: 43–59. 
Bettinger, Robert L. 2015. Orderly Anarchy: Sociopolitical Evolution in Aboriginal California. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Bettinger, Robert L. and Martin A. Baumhoff. 1982. ‘The Numic spread:Great Basin cultures in competition.’ American Antiquity 47: 485–503. 
Betts, Christopher J. 1984. ‘Early Deism in France: from the so-called“Deistes” of Lyon (1564) to Voltaire’s “Lettres Philosophiques” (1734).’International Archives of the History of Ideas. Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 
Betzenhauser, Alleen and Timothy R. Pauketat. 2019. ‘Elements ofCahokian neighborhoods.’ Archaeological Papers of the AmericanAnthropological Association 30: 133–47. 
Biocca, Ettore and Helena Valero. 1965. Yanoáma: dal racconto di una donna rapita dagli Indi. Bari: Leonardo da Vinci. 
Birch, Jennifer. 2015. ‘Current research on the historical development ofNorthern Iroquoian societies.’ Journal of Archaeological Research 23: 263–323. 
Bird, Douglas W. et al. 2019. ‘Variability in the organization and size ofhunter-gatherer groups: foragers do not live in small-scale societies.’Journal of Human Evolution 131: 96–108. 
Blackburn, Carole. 2000. Harvest of Souls: The Jesuit Missions and Colonialism in North America, 1632–1650. Montreal and Kingston:McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Blackburn, Thomas C. 1976. ‘Ceremonial integration and social interactionin Aboriginal California.’ In Bean and Blackburn, pp. 225–44.
Blanton, Richard E. 1998. ‘Beyond centralization: steps toward a theory ofegalitarian behaviour in archaic states.’ In G. A. Feinman and J. Marcus(eds), Archaic States. Santa Fe: School of American Research, pp. 135–72. 
Blanton, Richard E., Gary Feinman, Stephen A. Kowalewski and Peter N.Peregrine. 1996. ‘A dual-processual theory for the evolution ofMesoamerican civilization.’ Current Anthropology 37 (1): 1–14.
Blanton, Richard and Lane Fargher. 2008. Collective Action in the Formation of Pre-Modern States. New York: Springer.
Blau, Harold. 1963. ‘Dream guessing: a comparative analysis.’Ethnohistory 10: 233–49. 
Bloch, Maurice. 1977. ‘The past and the present in the present.’ Man (N.S.)12 (2): 278–92.
—. 2008. ‘Why religion is nothing special but is central.’ PhilosophicalTransactions of the Royal Society B 363: 2055–61. 
—. 2013. In and Out of Each Other’s Bodies: Theory of Mind, Evolution,Truth, and the Nature of the Social. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 
Boas, Franz and George Hunt. 1905. Kwakiutl Texts. Publications of the Jesup North Paciﬁc Expedition, vol. 3. Leiden: Brill.
Boehm, Christopher. 1999. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behaviour. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bogaard, Amy. 2005. ‘“Garden agriculture” and the nature of early farmingin Europe and the Near East.’ World Archaeology 37 (2): 177–96.
Bogaard, Amy et al. 2014. ‘Locating land use at Neolithic Çatalhöyük,Turkey: the implications of 87SR/86SR signatures in plants and sheeptooth sequences.’ Archaeometry 56 (5): 860–77.
Boivin, Nicole, Dorian Q. Fuller and Alison Crowther. 2012. ‘Old Worldglobalization and the Columbian exchange: comparison and contrast.’World Archaeology 44 (3): 452–69.
Boivin, Nicole et al. 2016. ‘Ecological consequences of human nicheconstruction: examining long-term anthropogenic shaping of globalspecies distributions.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113: 6388–96. 
Bookchin, Murray 1982. The Ecology of Freedom. Palo Alto: Cheshire Books. 
—1992. Urbanization Without Cities: The Rise and Decline of Citizenship.Montreal and New York: Black Rose Books. 
Bowles, Samuel and Jung-Kyoo Choi. 2013. ‘Coevolution of farming andprivate property during the early Holocene.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (22): 8830–35.
Braidwood, Robert. 1957. Prehistoric Men. Chicago: Natural HistoryMuseum Press. 
Braswell, Geoffrey E. (ed.). 2003. The Maya and Teotihuacan:Reinterpreting Early Classic Interaction. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
—. 2012. The Ancient Maya of Mexico: Reinterpreting the Past of theNorthern Maya Lowlands. Shefﬁeld: Equinox.
Braun, David P. 1986. ‘Midwestern Hopewellian exchange andsupralocation interaction.’ In Colin Renfrew and John. F. Cherry (eds),Peer Polity Interaction and Socio-Political Change. Cambridge and NewYork: Cambridge University Press, pp. 117–26. 
Brightman, Robert. 1999. ‘Traditions of subversion and the subversion oftradition: cultural criticism in Maidu clown performances.’ American Anthropologist 101 (2): 272–87.
Brisch, Nicole (ed.). 2008. Religion and Power: Divine Kingship in theAncient World and Beyond. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Broodbank, Cyprian. 2014. The Making of the Middle Sea: A History of theMediterranean from the Beginning to the Emergence of the ClassicalWorld. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Brown, James A. 1990. ‘Archaeology confronts history at the Natcheztemple.’ Southwestern Archaeology 9 (1): 1–10.
Brown, Judith K. 1970. ‘Economic organization and the position of womenamong the Iroquois.’ Ethnohistory 17 (3–4): 151–67.
Brown, Philip C. 2006. ‘Arable land as commons: land reallocation in earlymodern Japan.’ Social Science History 30 (3): 431–61.
Bryan, Kirk. 1929. ‘Flood-water farming.’ Geographical Review 19 (3):444–56. 
Buckley, Thomas. 2002. Standing Ground: Yurok Indian Spirituality, 1850– 1990. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Buikstra, Jane E. et al. 2004. ‘Tombs from the Copan Acropolis: a lifehistory approach.’ In E. E. Bell et al. (eds.), pp. 185–205.
Burger, Richard. L. 2003. ‘The Chavin Horizon: chimera or socioeconomicmetamorphosis.’ In Don S. Rice (ed.), Latin American Horizons. Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, pp. 41–82.
—. 2008. ‘Chavín de Huántar and its sphere of inﬂuence.’ In H. Silvermanand W. Isbell (eds), Handbook of South American Archaeology. New York: Springer, pp. 681–703.
—. 2011. ‘What kind of hallucinogenic snuff was used at Chavín deHuántar? An iconographic identiﬁcation.’ Journal of Andean Archaeology 31 (2): 123–40.
Burke, Peter. 2009. Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe. Farnham,Surrey: Ashgate.
Burns, Louis F. 2004. A History of the Osage People. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
Byers, A. Martin. 2006. Cahokia: A World Renewal Cult Heterarchy. Gainsville: University Press of Florida.
Caillois, R. (transl. M. Barash). 2001 [1939]. Man and the Sacred. Glencoe: University of Illinois Press. 
Campbell, Roderick. 2009. ‘Towards a networks and boundaries approachto early complex polities: the Late Shang Case.’ Current Anthropology 50 (6): 821–48.
—. 2014. ‘Transformations of violence: on humanity and inhumanity inearly China.’ In Campbell (ed.), pp. 94–118.
—. (ed.) 2014. Violence and Civilization: Studies of Social Violence in History and Prehistory. Oxford: Oxbow. 
Canetti, Elias. 1962. Crowds and Power. London: Gollancz. 
Cannadine, David. 2001. Ornamentalism: How the British Saw their Empire. London: Penguin.
Canuto, Marcello et al. 2018. ‘Ancient lowland Maya complexity asrevealed by airborne laser scanning of northern Guatemala.’ Science 361 (6409): eaau0137.
Capriles, José. 2019. ‘Persistent Early to Middle Holocene tropical foragingin southwestern Amazonia.’ Science Advances 5 (4): eaav5449.
Carballo, David M. et al. 2019. ‘New research at Teotihuacan’s Tlajingadistrict, 2012–2015.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 30: 95–113. 
Carbonell, Eudald and Marina Mosquera. 2006. ‘The emergence of asymbolic behaviour: the sepulchral pit of Sima de los Huesos, Sierra deAtapuerca, Burgos, Spain.’ Comptes Rendus Palevol 5 (1–2): 155–60.
Carr, Christopher. 2005. ‘The tripartite ceremonial alliance among SciotoHopewellian communities and the question of social ranking.’ In Caseand Carr (eds), pp. 258–338.
Carr, Christopher and D. Troy Case. 2005. Gathering Hopewell: Society, Ritual, and Ritual Interaction. New York: Kluwer Academic. 
Carr, Christopher et al. 2008. ‘The functions and meanings of OhioHopewell ceremonial artifacts in ethnohistorical perspective.’ In Caseand Carr (eds), pp. 501–21.
Case, D. Troy and Christopher Carr (eds), 2008. The Scioto Hopewell andtheir Neighbors: Bioarchaeological Documentation and CulturalUnderstanding. Berlin: Springer.
Castillo Butters, Luis Jaime. 2005. ‘Las Señoras de San José de Moro:Rituales funerarios de mujeres de élite en la costa norte del Perú.’ InDivina y humana. La mujer en los antiguos Perú y México. Lima: Ministerio de Educación, pp. 18–29.
Cervantes de Salazar, Franciso. 1914. Crónica de la Nueva España.Madrid: The Hispanic Society of America. 
Chadwick, H. M. 1926. The Heroic Age. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. 
Chagnon, Napoleon. 1968. Yanomamö: The Fierce People. New York; London: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
—. 1970. ‘Ecological and adaptive aspects of California shell money.’UCLA Archaeological Survey Annual Report 12:1–25. 
—. 1988. ‘Life histories, blood revenge, and warfare in a tribal population.’Science 239 (4843): 985–92.
—. 1990. ‘Reply to Albert.’ Current Anthropology 31 (1): 49–53.
Chang, Kwang-chih. 1999. ‘China on the eve of the historical period.’ InLoewe and Shaughnessy (eds), pp. 37–73.
Chapman, John. 2010. ‘Houses, households, villages, and proto-cities inSoutheastern Europe.’ In Anthony (ed.), pp. 74–89.
Chapman, John and Bisserka Gaydarska. 2003. ‘The provision of salt toTripolye mega-Sites.’ In Aleksey Korvin-Piotrovsky, Vladimir Kruts andSergei M. Rizhov (eds), Tripolye Settlements-Giants. Kiev: Institute of Archaeology, pp. 203–11.
Chapman, John, Bisserka Gaydarska and Duncan Hale. 2016. ‘Nebelivka:assembly houses, ditches, and social structure.’ In Müller et al. (eds), pp.117–32. 
Charles, Douglas and Jane E. Buikstra (eds). 2006. Recreating Hopewell. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.
Charlevoix, Pirre Francois Xavier de. 1944 [1744]. Journal d’un voyage faitpar ordre du roi dans l’Amérique septentrionnale. Édition critique parPierre Berthiaume. 2 vols. Bibliothèque du Nouveau Monde. Montreal:Les Presses de l’Université de Montréal. 
Chase, Alexander W. 1873. ‘Indian mounds and relics on the coast ofOregon.’ American Journal of Science and Arts 7 (31): 26–32.
Chase-Dunn, Christopher K. and Kelly Marie Mann. 1998. The Wintu and Their Neighbors: A Very Small World System. Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 
Chiappelli, Fredi (ed.). 1976. First Images of America: The Impact of theNew World on the Old. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Childe, V. G. 1936. Man Makes Himself. London: Watts. 
—. 1950. ‘The urban revolution.’ Town Planning Review 21: 3–17. 
Chinard, Gilbert. 1911. L’Exotisme Américain dans la littérature française au XVIe siècle. Paris: Hachette. 
—. 1913. L’Amérique et le rêve exotique dans la littérature française auXVIIe et au XVIIIe siècle. Paris: Hachette. 
—. (ed.) 1931. ‘Introduction.’ Dialogues curieux entre l’auteur et unsauvage de bons sens qui a voyagé, et Mémoires de l’Amériqueseptentrionale by Lahontan, Louis Armand de Lom d’Arce. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Christie, Agatha. 1936. Murder in Mesopotamia. London: Collins. 
Clark, John E. 1997. ‘The arts of government in Early Mesoamerica.’Annual Review of Anthropology 26: 211–34. 
—. 2004. ‘Surrounding the sacred: geometry and design of early moundgroups as meaning and function.’ In Jon L. Gibson and Philip J. Carr(eds), Signs of Power: The Rise of Complexity in the Southeast.Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, pp. 162–213.
Clarke, David. L. 1973. ‘Archaeology: the loss of innocence.’ Antiquity 43: 6–18. 
—. 1978. Mesolithic Europe: The Economic Basis. London: Duckworth. 
Clastres, Pierre. 1987 [1974]. Society Against the State: Essays in PoliticalAnthropology. New York: Zone Books. 
Clayton, Lawrence A., Vernon J. Knight and Edward C. Moore. 1993. The De Soto Chronicles: The Expedition of Hernando de Soto to NorthAmerica in 1539–1543. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
Clement, Charles R. et al. 2015. ‘The domestication of Amazonia beforeEuropean conquest.’ Proceedings of the Royal Society B 282: 20150813. 
Clendinnen, Inga. 1987. Ambivalent Conquests: Maya and Spaniard in Yucatan, 1517–1570. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—. 1991. Aztecs: An Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. 
Cobb, Charles R. and Brian M. Butler. 2002. ‘The Vacant Quarter revisited:Late Mississippian abandonment of the Lower Ohio Valley.’ American Antiquity 67 (4): 625–41.
Cobb, Charles R. and Adam King. 2005. ‘Re-Inventing Mississippiantradition at Etowah, Georgia.’ Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 12 (3): 167–93.
Codere, Helen. 1950. Fighting with Property: A Study of KwakiutlPotlatching and Warfare, 1792–1930. New York: J. J. Augustin.
Colas, Pierre. R. 2011. ‘Writing in space: glottographic and semasiographicnotation at Teotihuacan.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 22 (1): 13–25. 
Colledge, Sue, James Conolly and Stephen Shennan. 2004.‘Archaeobotanical evidence for the spread of farming in the easternMediterranean.’ Current Anthropology 45 (4): 35–58.
—. 2005. ‘The evolution of Neolithic farming from SW Asian Origins toNW European limits.’ European Journal of Archaeology 8 (2): 137–56.
Colledge, Sue and James Conolly (eds). 2007. The Origins and Spread ofDomestic Plants in Southwest Asia and Europe. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press. 
Conklin, William J. and Jeffrey Quilter (eds). 2008. Chavín: Art,Architecture, and Culture. Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology.
Cook, Jill. 2015. ‘Was bedeutet ein Name? Ein Rückblick auf dieUrsprünge, Geschichte und Unangemessenheit des Begriffs Venusﬁgur.’ Zeitschrift für niedersächsische Archäologie 66: 43–72. 
Cook, Robert A. 2017. Continuity and Change in the Native AmericanVillage: Multicultural Origins and Descendants of the Fort AncientCulture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coon, Matthew S. 2009. ‘Variation in Ohio Hopewell political economies.’American Antiquity 74 (1): 49–76.
Cork, Edward. 2005. ‘Peaceful Harappans? Reviewing the evidence for theabsence of warfare in the Indus Civilization of north-west India and Pakistan (c.2500–1900 BC).’ Antiquity 79 (304): 411–23. 
Cortés, Hernando. 1928. Five Letters, 1519–1526. London: Routledge.
Costa, Luiz. 2017. The Owners of Kinship: Asymmetrical Relations inIndigenous Amazonia. Chicago: HAU Books.
Costa, Luiz and Carlos Fausto. 2019. ‘The enemy, the unwilling guest, andthe jaguar host: an Amazonian story.’ L’Homme (231–2): 195–226.
Coudart, Anick. 1998. Architecture et Société Néolithique. Paris: Éditions de la Maison des Sciences de l’Homme. 
Coupland, Gary, Kathlyn Stewart and Katherine Patton. 2010. ‘Do you everget tired of salmon? Evidence for extreme salmon specialization at PrinceRupert Harbour, British Columbia.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 29: 189–207. 
Cowgill, George L. 1997. ‘State and society at Teotihuacan, Mexico.’Annual Review of Anthropology 26: 129–61. 
—. 2003. ‘Teotihuacan and early classic interaction: a perspective fromoutside the Maya region.’ In Braswell (ed.), pp. 315–35.
—. 2008. ‘An update on Teotihuacan.’ Antiquity 82: 962–75. 
—. 2015. Ancient Teotihuacan. Early Urbanism in Central Mexico.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crawford, Harriet (ed.). 2013. The Sumerian World. Abingdon; New York: Routledge.
Crazzolara, Joseph Pasquale. 1951. The Lwoo, Part II: Lwoo Traditions. Verona: Missioni Africane. 
Crema, Enrico R. 2013. ‘Cycles of change in Jomon settlement: a casestudy from eastern Tokyo Bay.’ Antiquity 87 (338): 1169–81. 
Cro, Stelio. 1990. The Noble Savage: Allegory of Freedom. Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfred Laurier University Press.
Crosby, Alfred. W. 1972. The Columbian Exchange: Biological andCultural Consequences of 1492. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
—.1986. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe,900–1900 BC. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Croucher, Karina. 2012. Death and Dying in the Neolithic Near East.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—. 2017. ‘Keeping the dead close: grief and bereavement in the treatmentof skulls from the Neolithic Middle East.’ Mortality 23 (2): 103–20.
Crown, Patricia L. et al. 2012. ‘Ritual Black Drink consumption atCahokia.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 109 (35): 13944–9.
Crumley, Carole. 1995. ‘Heterarchy and the analysis of complex societies.’Archaeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association 6 (1): 1–5.
Crüsemann, Nicola et al. (eds). 2019. Uruk: City of the Ancient World. Los Angeles: The J. Paul Getty Museum.
Cunliffe, Barry (ed.). 1998. Prehistoric Europe: An Illustrated History.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cushing, Frank Hamilton. 1896. ‘Exploration of the ancient key dwellers’remains on the Gulf Coast of Florida.’ Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 35: 329–448. 
Cushner, Nicholas P. 2006. Why Have You Come Here? The Jesuits and theFirst Evangelization of Native America. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress. 
Dalley, Stephanie. 2000. Myths from Mesopotamia: Creation, The Flood,Gilgamesh, and Others. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
D’Altroy, Terence N. 2015. The Incas (2nd edn). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Davis, E. N. 1995. ‘Art and politics in the Aegean: the missing ruler.’ InPaul Rehak (ed.), The Role of the Ruler in the Prehistoric Aegean(Aegaeum 11). Liège: University of Liège, pp. 11–20.
Day, John W. et al. 2007. ‘Emergence of complex societies after sea levelstabilized.’ EOS 88 (15): 169–76.
De Waal, Frans. 2000. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among Apes. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
DeBoer, Warren R. 1993. ‘Like a rolling stone: the Chunkey game andpolitical organization in Eastern North America.’ Southeastern Archaeology 12: 83–92. 
—. 1997. ‘Ceremonial centers from the Cayapas to Chillicothe.’ CambridgeArchaeological Journal 7: 225–53. 
—. 2001. ‘Of dice and women: gambling and exchange in Native NorthAmerica.’ Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 8 (3): 215–68.
Deino, Alan L. et al. 2018. ‘Chronology of the Acheulean to Middle Stonetransition in eastern Africa.’ Science 360 (6384): 95–8.
Delâge, Denys (transl. Jane Brierley). 1993. Bitter Feast: Amerindians and Europeans in Northeastern North America, 1600–64. Vancouver: UBC Press. 
Denevan, William M. 1992. The Native Population of the Americas in1492. Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press.
Denham, Timothy et al. 2003. ‘Origins of agriculture at Kuk Swamp in thehighlands of New Guinea.’ Science 301 (5630): 189–93.
Dennis, Matthew. 1993. Cultivating a Landscape of Peace: Iroquois-European Encounters in Seventeenth-Century America. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Descola, Philippe. 1994. ‘Pourquoi les Indiens d’Amazonie n’ont-ils pasdomestiqué le pécari? Genéalogie des objets et anthropologie de l’objectivation.’ In Bruno Latour and Pierre Lemonnier (eds), De la préhistoire aux missiles balistiques: L’intelligence sociale destechniques. Paris: La Découverte, pp. 329–44.
—. 2005. Par-delà nature et culture. Paris: Éditions Gallimard. 
Detienne, Marcel. 1994. The Gardens of Adonis. Spices in Greek Mythology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Diamond, Jared. 1987. ‘The worst mistake in the history of the humanrace.’ Discover Magazine (May 1987).
—. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York; London: W. W. Norton.
—. 2012. The World Until Yesterday: What Can We Learn from TraditionalSocieties? London: Allen Lane. 
Dickason, Olive Patricia. 1984. The Myth of the Savage and the Beginningsof French Colonialism in the Americas. Alberta: University of AlbertaPress. 
Dickson, D. Bruce. 2006. ‘Public transcripts expressed in theatres ofcruelty: the Royal Graves at Ur in Mesopotamia.’ CambridgeArchaeological Journal 16 (2): 123–44.
Dietrich, Laura et al. 2019. ‘Cereal processing at Early Neolithic GöbekliTepe, southeastern Turkey.’ PLoS ONE 14 (5): e0215214.
Dietrich, O., L. Dietrich and J. Notroff. 2019. ‘Anthropomorphic imagery atGöbekli Tepe.’ In J. Becker, C. Beuger and B. Müller-Neuhof (eds),Human Iconography and Symbolic Meaning in Near Eastern Prehistory. Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences, pp. 151–66.
Dietrich, Olivier, Manfred Heun, Jens Notroff and Klaus Schmidt. 2012.‘The role of cult and feasting in the emergence of Neolithic communities.New evidence from Göbekli Tepe, south-eastern Turkey.’ Antiquity 86 (333): 674–95.
Dodds Pennock, Caroline. 2008. Bonds of Blood: Gender, Lifecyle, and Sacriﬁce in Aztec Culture. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
—. 2017. ‘Gender and Aztec life cycles.’ In D. L. Nichols and E.Rodríguez-Algería (eds), The Oxford Handbook of the Aztecs. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 387–98.
Domenici, Davide. 2018. ‘Beyond dichotomies: Teotihuacan and theMesoamerican urban tradition.’ In D. Domenici and N. Marchetti,Urbanized Landscapes in Early Syro-Mesopotamia and PrehispanicMesoamerica. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag, pp. 35–70.
Donald, Leland. 1997. Aboriginal Slavery on the Northwest Coast of NorthAmerica. Berkeley: University of California Press.
—. 2003. ‘The Northwest Coast as a study area: natural, prehistoric, andethnographic issues.’ In G. G. Coupland, R. G. Matson, and Q. Mackie(eds), Emerging from the Mist: Studies in Northwest Coast CultureHistory. Vancouver: UBC Press, pp. 289–327. 
Douglas, Mary. 1966. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Concepts ofPollution and Taboo. London: Routledge.
Driver, Harold. E. 1938. ‘Culture element distributions VIII: The reliabilityof culture element data.’ Anthropological Records 1: 205–20. 
—. 1962. ‘The contribution of A. L. Kroeber to culture area theory andpractice.’ Indiana University Publications in Anthropology andLinguistics (Memoir 18).
Drucker, Philip. 1981. ‘On the nature of Olmec polity.’ In Elizabeth P.Benson (ed.), The Olmec and Their Neighbors: Essays in Memory ofMatthew W. Stirling. Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, pp. 29–47.
Du Bois, Cora. 1935. ‘Wintu Ethnography.’ University of CaliforniaPublications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 36 (1): 1–142.Berkeley: University of California Press.
Duchet, Michèle. 1995. Anthropologie et histoire au siècle des Lumières. Paris: A. Michel. 
Dumont, Louis. 1972. Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and its Implications. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 
—. 1992. Essays on Individualism: Modern Ideology in AnthropologicalPerspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dunbar, Robin I. M. 1988. Primate Social Systems. London and Sydney:Croom Helm. 
—. 1992. ‘Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates.’Journal of Human Evolution 20: 469–93. 
—. 1996. Grooming, Gossip, and the Evolution of Language. London: Faber and Faber. 
—. 2010. How Many Friends Does One Person Need? Dunbar’s Numberand Other Evolutionary Quirks. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress. 
Dunbar, Robin I. M., Clive Gamble and John A. K. Gowlett (eds). 2014.Lucy to Language: The Benchmark Papers. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress.
Durkheim, Émile. 1915 [1912]. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life.London: Allen and Unwin. 
Eastman, Charles A. 1937. Indian Boyhood. Boston: Little, Brown andCompany.
Edinborough, Kevan et al. 2017. ‘Radiocarbon test for demographic eventsin written and oral history.’ PNAS 114 (47): 12436–41. 
Edmonson, Munro S. 1982. The Ancient Future of the Itza: The Book of Chilam Balam of Tizimin. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Edwards, Tai S. 2010. ‘Osage Gender: Continuity, Change, andColonization, 1720s-1870s.’ Doctoral dissertation, University of Kansas.
Eliade, Mircea. 1959. The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Elias, Norbert. 1969. The Court Society. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Ellingson, Ter. 2001. The Myth of the Noble Savage. Berkeley: Universityof California Press. 
Emerson, Thomas. 1997a. Cahokia and the Archaeology of Power. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
—. 1997b. ‘Reﬂections from the countryside on Cahokian hegemony.’ InPauketat and Emerson (eds), pp. 167–89.
—. 2007. ‘Cahokia and the evidence for Late Pre-Columbian war in the North American midcontinent.’ In R. J. Chacon and R. G. Mendoza (eds), North American Indigenous Warfare and Ritual Violence. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, pp. 129–48.
—. 2012. ‘Cahokia interaction and ethnogenesis in the northernMidcontinent.’ In Timothy R. Pauketat (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of North American Archaeology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 398–409. 
Emerson, Thomas E. and R. Barry Lewis (eds). 1991. Cahokia and the Hinterlands: Middle Mississippian Cultures of The Midwest. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Emerson, Thomas. E. and Kristin. M. Hedman. 2014. ‘The dangers ofdiversity: the consolidation and dissolution of Cahokia, Native America’sﬁrst urban polity.’ In Ronald K. Faulseit (ed.), Beyond Collapse:Archaeological Perspectives on Resilience, Revitalization, andTransformation in Complex Societies. Carbondale: Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University Press,Occasional Paper no. 42, pp. 147–75.
Emerson, Thomas et al. 2016. ‘Paradigms lost: reconﬁguring Cahokia’sMound 72 Beaded Burial.’ American Antiquity 81 (3): 405–25.
Emerson, Thomas E., Brad H. Koldeho and Tamira K. Brennan (eds). 2018.Revealing Greater Cahokia, North America’s First Native City:Rediscovery and Large-Scale Excavations of the East St. Louis Precinct. 
Studies in Archaeology 12. Urbana: Illinois State Archaeological Survey,University of Illinois.
Enajero, Samuel. 2015. Collective Institutions in Industrialized Nations. New York: Page.
Engelbrecht, William. 2003. Iroquoia: The Development of a Native World. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Englund, Robert K. 1988. ‘Administrative timekeeping in ancientMesopotamia.’ Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient31 (2): 121–85.
—. 1998. ‘Texts from the Late Uruk period.’ In J. Bauer, R. K. Englund and
M. Krebernik (eds), Mesopotamien. Späturuk-Zeit und Frühdynastische
Zeit. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht.
—. 2009. ‘The smell of the cage.’ Cuneiform Digital Library 4. 
Erdal, Yilmaz. 2015. ‘Bone or ﬂesh: deﬂeshing and post-depositionaltreatments at Körtik Tepe (Southeastern Anatolia, PPNA Period).’European Journal of Archaeology 18 (1): 4–32.
Erickson, Clark L. 2008. ‘Amazonia: the historical ecology of adomesticated landscape.’ In H. Silverman and W. Isbell (eds), Handbook of South American Archaeology. New York: Springer, pp. 157–83.
Erlandson, Jon et al. 2007. ‘The Kelp Highway hypothesis: marine ecology,the coastal migration theory, and the peopling of the Americas.’ The Journal of Island and Coastal Archaeology 2 (2): 161–74.
Ethridge, Robbie. 2010. From Chicaza to Chickasaw: The EuropeanInvasion and the Transformation of the Mississippian World, 1540–1715.Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Étienne, Louis. 1871. ‘Un Roman socialiste d’autrefois.’ Revue des deux mondes, 15 Juillet.
Eyre, Christopher J. 1999. ‘The village economy in Pharaonic Egypt.’ InAlan K. Bowman and Eugene Rogan (eds), Proceedings of the BritishAcademy, 96: Agriculture in Egypt from Pharaonic to Modern Times. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 33–60.
Fairbairn, Andrew et al. 2006. ‘Seasonality (Çatalhöyük East).’ In IanHodder (ed.), Çatalhöyük Perspectives: Themes from the 1995–9 Seasons. Cambridge: McDonald Institute Monographs, British Instituteof Archaeology at Ankara, pp. 93–108.
Fairbanks, Charles. 1979. ‘The function of Black Drink among the Creeks.’In C. Hudson (ed.), pp. 120–49. 
Fargher, Lane, Richard E. Blanton and Verenice Y. Heredia Espinoza. 2010.‘Egalitarian ideology and political power in prehispanic Central Mexico:the case of Tlaxcalan.’ Latin American Antiquity 21 (3): 227–51.
Fargher, Lane, Verenice Y. Heredia Espinoza and Richard E. Blanton. 2011.‘Alternative pathways to power in late Postclassic HighlandMesoamerica.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30: 306–26. 
Fargher, Lane et al. 2011. ‘Tlaxcallan: the archaeology of an ancientrepublic in the New World.’ Antiquity 85: 172–86. 
Fausto, Carlo. 1999. ‘Of enemies and pets: warfare and shamanism inAmazonia.’ American Ethnologist 26 (4): 933–56.
—. 2008. ‘Too many owners: mastery and ownership in Amazonia.’ Mana 14 (2): 329–66.
Fausto, Carlo and Eduardo G. Neves. 2009. ‘Was there ever a Neolithic inthe Neo-tropics? Plant familiarization and biodiversity in the Amazon.’Antiquity 92 (366): 1604–18.
Federici, Silvia. 1998. Caliban and the Witch. New York: Autonomedia. 
Fenton, William N. 1949. ‘Seth Newhouse’s traditional history andconstitution of the Iroquois Confederacy.’ Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 93 (2): 141–58.
—. 1998. The Great Law and the Longhouse: A Political History of theIroquois Confederacy. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1998.
Ferguson, R. Brian. 1989. ‘Do Yanomamo killers have more kids?’American Ethnologist 16 (3): 564–5.
Ferguson, R. Brian and Neil L. Whitehead. 1992. War in the Tribal Zone: Expanding States and Indigenous Warfare. Santa Fe: School for Advanced Research. 
Field, Stephanie, Anne Goldberg and Tina Lee. 2005. ‘Gender, status, andethnicity in the Scioto, Miami, and Northeastern Ohio Hopewellianregions, as evidenced by mortuary practices.’ In Carr and Case (eds), pp.386–404. 
Fischer, Claude S. 1977. ‘Comment on Mayhew and Levinger’s “Size andthe density of interaction in human aggregates”.’ American Journal of Sociology 83 (2): 452–5.
Fitzhugh, William W. 1985. Cultures in Contact: the Impact of EuropeanContacts on Native American Cultural Institutions A.D. 1000–1800. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press. 
Flannery, Kent and Joyce Marcus. 2012. The Creation of Inequality: Howour Prehistoric Ancestors Set the Stage for Monarchy, Slavery, andEmpire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fleming Daniel. E. 2009. Democracy’s Ancient Ancestors: Mari and Early Collective Governance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fletcher, Alice C. and Francis La Flesche. 1911. ‘The Omaha tribe.’Twenty-seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology,1905–6. Washington: Bureau of American Ethnology, pp. 17–654.
Fletcher, Roland. 1995. The Limits of Settlement Growth: A Theoretical Outline. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flew, Antony. 1989. An Introduction to Western Philosophy: Ideas andArgument from Plato to Popper. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Fogelson, Raymond D. 1984. ‘Who were the Aní-Kutánî? An excursioninto Cherokee historical thought.’ Ethnohistory 31 (4): 255–63.
Formicola, Vincenzo. 2007. ‘From the Sungir children to the Romito dwarf:aspects of the Upper Palaeolithic funerary landscape.’ Current Anthropology 48: 446–53. 
Foster, Benjamin. 1981. ‘A new look at the Sumerian temple state.’ Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 24 (3): 225–41.
Fowler, Melvin. L. 1997. The Cahokia Atlas: A Historical Atlas of Cahokia Archaeology. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Fowler, Melvin L. et al. 1999. The Mound 72 Area: Dedicated and Sacred Space in Early Cahokia. Reports of Investigation no. 54. Springﬁeld:Illinois State Museum. 
Frangipane, Marcella. 2006. ‘The Arslantepe “Royal Tomb”: new funerarycustoms and political changes in the Upper Euphrates valley at thebeginning of the third millennium BC.’ In G. Bartoloni and M. G. Benedettini (eds), Buried Among the Living. Rome: Università degli studidi Roma ‘La Sapienza’, pp. 169–94.
—. 2012. ‘Fourth millennium Arslantepe: the development of a centralizedsociety without urbanization.’ Origini 34: 19–40. 
Frankfort, Henri. 1948. Kingship and the Gods: A Study of Ancient NearEastern Religion as the Integration of Society and Nature. Chicago:Chicago University Press.
—. 1951. The Birth of Civilization in the Near East. Bloomington: IndianaUniversity Press. 
Franklin, Benjamin. 1961 [1753]. Letter to Peter Collinson, 9 May 1753. InLeonard W. Labaree (ed.), The Papers of Benjamin Franklin. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press, vol. 4, pp. 481–3.
Franks, C. E. S. 2002. ‘In search of the savage Sauvage: an exploration intoNorth America’s political cultures.’ The American Review of Canadian Studies 32 (4): 547–80.
Frazer, James G. 1911 [1890]. The Dying God (book 3 of The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion) (3rd edn). London: Macmillan.
Freidel, David A. and Linda Schele. 1988. ‘Kingship in the Late PreclassicMaya Lowlands: the instruments and places of ritual power.’ American Anthropologist 90 (3): 547–67.
Frenez, Dennys. 2018. ‘Private person or public persona? Use andsigniﬁcance of standard Indus seals as markers of formal socio-economicidentities.’ In D. Frenez et al. (eds), Walking with the Unicorn: SocialOrganization and Material Culture in Ancient South Asia. Oxford: Archaeopress, pp. 166–93.
Friedman, Renée F. 2008. ‘Excavating Egypt’s early kings: recentdiscoveries in the elite cemetery at Hierakonpolis.’ In B. Midant-Reynesand Y. Tristant (eds), Egypt at its Origins 2. Proceedings of theInternational Conference Origin of the State. Predynastic and EarlyDynastic Egypt, Toulouse, 5th–8th September 2005. Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 172. Leuven: Peeters, pp. 1157–94.
—. 2011. ‘Hierakonpolis.’ In Teeter (ed.), pp. 33–44.
Froese, Tom, Carlos Gershenson and Linda R. Manzanilla. 2014. ‘Cangovernment be self-organized? A mathematical model of the collectivesocial organization of ancient Teotihuacan, Central Mexico.’ PLoS ONE 9 (10): e109966.
Fukuyama, Francis. 2011. The Origins of Political Order: From PrehumanTimes to the French Revolution. London: Proﬁle. 
Fuller, Dorian Q. 2007. ‘Contrasting patterns in crop domestication anddomestication rates: recent archaeobotanical insights from the OldWorld.’ Annals of Botany 100: 903–9. 
—. 2010. ‘An emerging paradigm shift in the origins of agriculture.’General Anthropology 17 (2): 8–12.
Fuller, Dorian Q. and Robin G. Allaby. 2010. ‘Seed dispersal and cropdomestication: shattering, germination and seasonality in evolution undercultivation.’ In L. Ostergaard (ed.), Fruit Development and Seed Dispersal (Annual Plant Reviews vol. 38). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 
238–95. 
Fuller, Dorian Q. et al. 2010. ‘Domestication as innovation: theentanglement of techniques, technology and chance in the domesticationof cereal crops.’ World Archaeology 42 (1): 13–28.
Fuller, Dorian Q. and Leilani Lucas. 2017. ‘Adapting crops, landscapes, andfood choices: Patterns in the dispersal of domesticated plants acrossEurasia.’ In N. Boivin et al. (eds), Complexity: Species Movements in theHolocene. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 304–31.
Furholt, Martin. 2018. ‘Massive migrations? The impact of recent aDNAstudies on our view of third millennium Europe.’ European Journal of Archaeology 21 (2): 159–91.
Gage, Matilda Joslyn. 1893. Woman, Church, and State. A HistoricalAccount of the Status of Woman through the Christian Ages: withReminiscences of Matriarchate. Chicago: C. H. Kerr.
Gardner, Peter M. 1991. ‘Foragers’ pursuit of individual autonomy.’Current Anthropology 32: 543–72. 
Garth, Thomas R. Jr. 1976. ‘Emphasis on industriousness among theAtsugewi.’ In Bean and Blackburn, pp. 337–54.
Geertz, Clifford 1980. Negara: The Theatre State in Nineteenth-Century Bali. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
—. 2001. ‘Life among the anthros.’ New York Review of Books 48 (2): 18–22. 
Geertz, Hildred and Clifford Geertz. 1978. Kinship in Bali. Chicago:Chicago University Press.
Gelb, Ignace J. 1973. ‘Prisoners of war in early Mesopotamia.’ Journal of Near Eastern Studies 32 (1/2): 70–98.
Gell, Alfred. 1993. Wrapping in Images: Tattooing in Polynesia. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas. 1976. Energy and Economic Myths:Institutional and Analytical Economic Essays. New York: Pergamon. 
Gerth, Hans H. and C. Wright Mills (eds). 1946. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gibson, Charles. 1952. Tlaxcala in the Sixteenth Century. New Haven, CTand London: Yale University Press.
Gibson, Jon L. 2000. Ancient Mounds of Poverty Point: Place of Rings.Gainesville: University Press of Florida. 
Gibson, Jon. L. and Philip J. Carr. 2004. ‘Big mounds, big rings, bigpower.’ In J. L. Gibson and P. J. Carr (eds), Signs of Power: The Rise ofComplexity in the Southeast. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, pp. 1–9.
Gimbutas, Marija. 1982. The Goddesses and Gods of Old Europe. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Giosan, Liviu et al. 2012. ‘Fluvial landscapes of the Harappan civilization.’PNAS: E1688–E1694. 
Godoy, Ricardo A. 1986. ‘The ﬁscal role of the Andean Ayllu.’ Man (N.S.)21 (4): 723–41.
Goldman, Irving. 1975. The Mouth of Heaven: An Introduction to Kwakiutl Religious Thought. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Goldschmidt, Walter. 1951. ‘Ethics and the structure of society: anethnological contribution to the sociology of knowledge.’ American Anthropologist 53 (4): 506–24.
Goldstein, Paul S. 2003. ‘From stew-eaters to maize-drinkers: the Chicha economy and Tiwanaku.’ In Tamara L. Bray (ed.), The Archaeology andPolitics of Food and Feasting in Early States and Empires. New York: Plenum, pp. 143–71.
Golitko, Mark and Lawrence H. Keeley. 2007. ‘Beating ploughshares backinto swords: warfare in the Linearbandkeramik.’ Antiquity 81: 332–42. 
Golla, Susan. 1987. ‘“He has a name”: History and Social Structure amongthe Indians of Western Vancouver Island.’ PhD. dissertation, ColumbiaUniversity.
Golson, Jack. et al. (eds). 2017. Ten Thousand Years of Cultivation at Kuk Swamp in the Highlands of Papua New Guinea. Acton, ACT: Australian National University Press.
Gombrich, Richard F. 1988. Therav.da Buddhism. A Social History fromAncient Benares to Modern Colombo. London and New York: Routledge. 
Gómez-Cano, Grisel. 2010. The Return to Caotlicue: Goddesses and Warladies in Mexican Folklore. Bloomington, Indiana: XLibris.
González González, Enrique. 2014. ‘A humanist in the New World:Francisco Cervantes de Salazar (c.1514–75).’ In L. Dietz et al. (eds),Neo-Latin and the Humanities: Essays in Honour of Charles E. Fantazzi.Toronto: Center for Reformation and Renaissance Studies, pp. 235–57.
Goodman, Jordan, Paul E. Lovejoy and Andrew G. Sherratt (eds). 1995.Consuming Habits: Drugs in Anthropology and History. London and 
New York: Routledge.
Gose, Peter. 1996. ‘Oracles, divine kingship, and political representation inthe Inka State.’ Ethnohistory 43 (1): 1–32.
—.2000. ‘The state as a chosen woman: brideservice and the feeding oftributaries in the Inka Empire.’ American Anthropologist 102 (1): 84–97.
—.2016. ‘Mountains, kurakas and mummies: transformations in indigenousAndean sovereignty.’ Población & Sociedad 23 (2): 9–34.
Gough, Kathleen. 1971. ‘Nuer Kinship: a re-examination.’ In T. O.Beidelman (ed.), The Translation of Culture. London: Tavistock, pp. 79– 122. 
Graeber, David. 1996. ‘Love magic and political morality in CentralMadagascar, 1875–1990.’ Gender & History 8 (3): 416–39.
—. 2001. Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coin ofOur Own Dreams. New York: Palgrave.
—. 2006. ‘Turning modes of production inside out: or, why capitalism is atransformation of slavery.’ Critique of Anthropology 26 (1): 61–85.
—. 2007a. Possibilities: Essays on Hierarchy, Rebellion, and Desire. Oakland, CA: AK Press.
—. 2007b. ‘There never was a West: or, democracy emerges from thespaces in between.’ In Graeber 2007a, pp. 329–74.
—. 2011. Debt: The First 5,000 Years. New York: Melville House. 
Graeber, David and Marshall Sahlins. 2017. On Kings. Chicago: HAUBooks. 
Grafﬁgny, Françoise de. 1747. Lettres d’une Péruvienne. Paris: A. Peine. (English translation by Jonathan Mallason. 2009. Letters of a Peruvian Woman. Oxford: Oxford University Press.)
Green, Adam S. 2020. ‘Killing the priest-king: addressing egalitarianism inthe Indus civilization.’ Journal of Archaeological Research. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10814-020-09147–9
Green, Richard. E., Johannes Krause et al. 2010. ‘A draft sequence of theNeanderthal genome.’ Science 328: 710–22. 
Gresky, Julia, Juliane Haelm and Lee Clare. 2017. ‘Modiﬁed human craniafrom Göbekli Tepe provide evidence for a new form of Neolithic skullcult.’ Science Advances 3: e1700564. 
Grier, Colin. 2017. ‘Expanding notions of hunter-gatherer diversity:identifying core organizational principles and practices in Coast SalishSocieties of the Northwest Coast of North America.’ In Graeme Warren 
and Bill Finlayson (eds), The Diversity of Hunter-Gatherer Pasts. Oxford: Oxbow Press, pp. 16–33.
Grinde, Donald A. 1977. The Iroquois and the Founding of the American Nation. San Francisco: Indian Historian Press. 
Groenewegen-Frankfort, Henriette. 1951. Arrest and Movement: An Essayon Space and Time in the Representational Art of the Ancient Near East.London: Faber and Faber. 
Gron, Kurt J. et al. 2018. ‘A meeting in the forest: hunters and farmers atthe Coneybury “Anomaly”, Wiltshire.’ Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 84: 111–44. 
Grube, Nikolai, Eva Eggebrecht and Matthias Seidel (eds). 2001. Maya:Divine Kings of the Rainforest. Cologne: Könemann.
Haak, Wolfgang et al. 2005. ‘Ancient DNA from the ﬁrst European farmersin 7,500-year-old Neolithic sites.’ Science 310: 1016–18. 
—. 2010. ‘Ancient DNA from European early Neolithic farmers revealstheir Near Eastern afﬁnities.’ PLoS Biology 8: 1–16. 
—. 2015. ‘Massive migration from the steppe was a source for Indo-European languages in Europe.’ Nature 522: 207–11. 
Haas, Jonathan and Matthew Piscitelli. 2013. ‘The prehistory of warfare:Misled by ethnography.’ In Douglas P. Fry (ed.), War, Peace, and HumanNature: The Convergence of Evolutionary and Cultural Views. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 168–90.
Habu, Junko. 2004. Ancient Jomon of Japan. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.
Habu, Junko and Clare Fawcett. 2008. ‘Science or narratives? Multipleinterpretations of the Sannai Maruyama site, Japan.’ In Junko Habu,Clare Fawcett and John M. Matsunaga (eds), Evaluating MultipleNarratives: Beyond Nationalist, Colonialist, Imperialist Archaeologies. New York: Springer, pp. 91–117.
Haddon, Alfred. C. and W. H. R. Rivers. 1902. ‘A method of recordingstring ﬁgures and tricks.’ Man 109: 146–53. 
Hahn, Steven C. 2004. The Invention of the Creek Nation, 1670–1763. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Hajda, Yvonne P. 2005. ‘Slavery in the Greater Lower Columbia region.’Ethnohistory 64 (1): 1–17.
Haklay, Gil and Avi Gopher. 2020. ‘Geometry and architectural planning atGöbekli Tepe, Turkey.’ Cambridge Archaeological Journal 30 (2): 343– 
57. 
Hall, Anthony J. 2003. The American Empire and the Fourth World.Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Hall, Robert L. 1997. An Archaeology of the Soul: North American Indian Belief and Ritual. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Halligan, Jessi J., Michael R. Waters et al. 2016. ‘Pre-Clovis occupation14,550 years ago at the Page-Ladson site, Florida, and the peopling of theAmericas.’ Scientiﬁc Advances 2 (5): e1600375.
Hamilton, Marcus et al. 2007. ‘The complex structure of hunter-gatherersocial networks.’ Proceedings of the Royal Society B 274: 2195–2202. 
Harari, Yuval N. 2014. Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind. London: Harvill Secker. 
Harris, David R. (ed.). 1996. The Origins and Spread of Agriculture and Pastoralism in Eurasia. London: UCL Press. 
Harris, Mary. 1997. Common Threads: Women, Mathematics, and Work. Stoke on Trent: Trentham. 
Harvati, Katerina et al. 2019. ‘Apidima cave fossils provide earliestevidence of Homo sapiens in Eurasia.’ Nature 571: 500–504. 
Harvey, David. 2012. Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution. London and New York: Verso. 
Harvey, David Allen. 2012. The French Enlightenment and its Others: TheMandarin, the Savage, and the Invention of the Human Sciences.London: Palgrave.
Hassett, Brenna R. and Haluk Sa.lamtimur. 2018. ‘Radical “royals”? Newevidence from Ba.ur Höyük for radical burial practices in the transitionto early states in Mesopotamia.’ Antiquity 92: 640–54. 
Hassig, Ross. 2001. ‘Xicotencatl: rethinking an indigenous Mexican hero.’Estudios de cultura náhuatl 32: 29–49. 
Havard, Gilles (transl. Phyllis Aronoff and Howard Scott). 2001. The Great Peace of Montreal of 1701: French-Native Diplomacy in the SeventeenthCentury. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Hayden, Brian. 1990. ‘Nimrods, piscators, pluckers, and planters: theemergence of food production.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 9: 31–69. 
—. 2014. The Power of Feasts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
He, Nu. 2013. ‘The Longshan period site of Taosi in Southern ShanxiProvince.’ In A. P. Underhill (ed.), A Companion to Chinese 
Archaeology. Chichester: Wiley, pp. 255–78.
—. 2018. ‘Taosi: an archaeological example of urbanization as a politicalcenter in prehistoric China.’ Archaeological Research in Asia 14: 20–32. 
Headrick, Annabeth. 2007. The Teotihuacan Trinity: The SociopoliticalStructure of an Ancient Mesoamerican City. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Healy, George R. 1958. ‘The French Jesuits and the idea of the noblesavage.’ William and Mary Quarterly 15: 143–67. 
Heard, Joseph Norman. 1977. ‘The Assimilation of Captives on theAmerican Frontier in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries.’ Doctoralthesis, Louisiana State University: LSU Digital Commons.
Heckenberger Michael J. et al. 2008. ‘Pre-Columbian urbanism,anthropogenic landscapes, and the future of the Amazon.’ Science 321: 1214–17. 
Heckenberger Michael J. and Eduardo G. Neves. 2009. ‘Amazonianarchaeology.’ Annual Review of Anthropolology 38: 251–66. 
Helwig, Barbara. 2012. ‘An age of heroes? Some thoughts on Early BronzeAge funerary customs in northern Mesopotamia.’ In H. Niehr et al. (eds),(Re-)constructing Funerary Rituals in the Ancient Near East. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 47–58.
Henige, David. 1999. ‘Can a myth be astronomically dated?’ American Indian Culture and Research Journal 23 (4): 127–57.
de Heusch, Luc (transl. Roy Willis). 1982. The Drunken King, or the Originof the State. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hill, Kim et al. 2011. ‘Co-residence patterns in hunter-gatherer societiesshow unique human social structure.’ Science 331: 1286–9. 
Hill, Warren and John E. Clark. 2001. ‘Sports, gambling, and government:America’s ﬁrst social compact?’ American Anthropologist 103 (2): 331–45. 
Hillman, Gordon C. and Stuart Davies. 1990. ‘Measured domesticationrates in wild wheats and barley under primitive cultivation, and theirarchaeological implications.’ Journal of World Prehistory 4 (2): 157–222.
Hobbes, Thomas. 1651. Leviathan: Or the Matter, Forme and Power of aCommonwealth, Ecclesiasticall and Civil. London: Andrew Crooke. 
Hocart, Arthur. M. 1954. Social Origins. London: Watts. 
—. 1969 [1927]. Kingship. London: Oxford University Press. 
—. 1970 [1936]. Kings and Councillors: An Essay in the ComparativeAnatomy of Human Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hodder, Ian. 2003. ‘The lady and the seed: some thoughts on the role ofagriculture in the Neolithic Revolution.’ In Mehmet Özdo.an, HaraldHauptmann and Nezih Ba.gelen (eds), From Villages to Cities: EarlyVillages in the Near East – Studies Presented to Ufuk Esin. Istanbul: Arkeoloji ve Sanat Yayinlari, pp. 155–61.
—. 2004. ‘Women and men at Çatalhöyük.’ Scientiﬁc American 290 (1):76–83. 
—. 2006. Çatalhöyük. The Leopard’s Tale. Revealing the Mysteries ofTurkey’s Ancient ‘Town’. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Hodder, Ian and Craig Cessford. 2004. ‘Daily practice and social memory atÇatalhöyük.’ American Antiquity 69 (1): 17–40.
Hodgen, Margaret Trabue. 1964. Early Anthropology in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hoffmann, Dirk et al. 2018. ‘U-Th dating of carbonate crusts revealsNeanderthal origin of Iberian cave art.’ Science 359 (6378): 912–15.
Holdaway, Simon J. and Willeke Wendrich (eds). 2017. The Desert FayumReinvestigated: The Early to Mid-Holocene Landscape Archaeology ofthe Fayum North Shore, Egypt. Los Angeles: UCLA Cotsen Institute ofArchaeology.
Holm, Tom. 2002. ‘American Indian warfare: the cycles of conﬂict and themilitarization of Native North America.’ In Philip J. Deloria and NealSalisbury (eds), A Companion to American Indian History. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 154–72.
Holt, Julie Zimmerman. 2009. ‘Rethinking the Ramey state: was Cahokiathe center of a theater state?’ American Antiquity 74 (2): 231–54.
Hornborg, Alf. 2005. ‘Ethnogenesis, regional interaction, and ecology inprehistoric Amazonia: toward a systems perspective.’ Current Anthropology 46 (4): 589–620.
Hornborg, Alf and Jonathan D. Hill (eds). 2011. Ethnicity in Amazonia:Reconstructing Past Identities from Archaeology, Linguistics, andEthnohistory. Boulder: University Press of Colorado.
Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer. 2009. Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Originsof Mutual Understanding. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hudson, Charles. 1976. The Southeastern Indians. Knoxville: University ofTennessee Press. 
—. (ed.) 1979. Black Drink: A Native American Tea. Athens: University ofGeorgia Press.
Hudson, Michael. 2018. And Forgive Them Their Debts: Lending,Foreclosure, and Redemption from Bronze Age Finance to the JubileeYear. Dresden: ISLET-Verlag.
Hudson, Michael and Baruch A. Levine (eds). 1996. Privatization in the Ancient Near East and the Classical World. Cambridge, MA: PeabodyMuseum of Archaeology and Ethnology.
Humphrey, Louise and Chris Stringer. 2018. Our Human Story. London: Natural History Museum.
Hunter, Graeme. 1989. ‘The fate of Thomas Hobbes.’ Studia Leibnitiana 21 (1): 5–20.
Hutchinson, Sharon. 1996. Nuer Dilemmas: Coping with Money, War, and the State. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hyland, Sabine. 2016. ‘How khipus indicated labour contributions in anAndean village: An explanation of colour banding, seriation andethnocategories.’ Journal of Material Culture 21 (4): 490–509.
—. 2017. ‘Writing with twisted cords: the inscriptive capacity of Andeankhipus.’ Current Anthropology 58 (3): 412–19.
Iakovleva, Lioudmila. 2015. ‘The architecture of mammoth bone circulardwellings of the Upper Palaeolithic settlements in Central and EasternEurope and their socio-symbolic meanings.’ Quaternary International359–60: 324–34. 
Ingold, Tim, David Riches and James Woodburn (eds). 1998. Hunters and Gatherers 1: History, Evolution and Social Change. Oxford: Berg. 
Insoll, Timothy (ed.). 2017. The Oxford Handbook of Prehistoric Figurines.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Isaac, Barry. L. 1983. ‘The Aztec “Flowery War”: a geopoliticalexplanation.’ Journal of Anthropological Research 39 (4): 415–32.
Isakhan, Benjamin. 2011. ‘What is so “primitive” about “primitivedemocracy”? Comparing the ancient Middle East and classical Athens.’In B. Isakhan and S. Stockwell (eds), The Secret History of Democracy. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 19–34.
Isbell, William H. 2008. ‘Wari and Tiwanaku: international identities in theCentral Andean Middle Horizon.’ In H. Silverman and W. H. Isbell (eds),The Handbook of South American Archaeology. New York: Springer, pp. 731–59. 
Jacobs, Jane. 1969. The Economy of Cities. New York: Knopf Doubleday.
Jacobs, Ken. 1995. ‘Returning to Oleni’ ostrov: social, economic, andskeletal dimensions of a Boreal Forest Mesolithic cemetery.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 14 (4): 359–403.
Jacobsen, Thorkild. 1943. ‘Primitive democracy in ancient Mesopotamia.’Journal of Near Eastern Studies 2 (3): 159–72.
—. 1976. The Treasures of Darkness: A History of Mesopotamian Religion. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
James, Hannah V. A. and Michael D. Petraglia. 2005. ‘Modern humanorigins and the evolution of behaviour in the Later Pleistocene record ofSouth Asia.’ Current Anthropology 46: 3–27. 
Jamieson, Susan M. 1992. ‘Regional interaction and Ontario Iroquoisevolution.’ Canadian Journal of Archaeology/Journal Canadiend’Archéologie 16: 70–88. 
Jansen, Michael. 1993. ‘Mohenjo-daro, type site of the earliest urbanizationprocess in South Asia; ten years of research at Mohenjo-daro Pakistanand an attempt at a synopsis.’ In A. Parpola and P. Koskikallio (eds),South Asian Archaeology. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, pp. 263–80. 
Jaubert, Jacques et al. 2016. ‘Early Neanderthal constructions deep inBruniquel Cave in southwestern France.’ Nature 534: 111–15. 
Jeunesse, C. 1997. Pratiques funéraires au néolithique ancien: Sépultures etnécropoles danubiennes 5500–4900 av. J.-C. Paris: Errance. 
Johansen, Bruce E. 1982. Forgotten Founders: Benjamin Franklin, theIroquois, and the Rationale for the American Revolution. Ipswich, MA:Gambit, Inc.
—. 1998. Debating Democracy: Native American Legacy of Freedom. Santa Fe: Clear Light Publishers.
Johansen, Bruce Elliot and Barbara Alice Mann (eds). 2000. Encyclopediaof the Haudenosaunee (Iroquois Confederacy). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 
Johnson, Douglas. 1997. Nuer Prophets: A History of Prophecy from theUpper Nile in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Johnson, Gregory A. 1982. ‘Organizational structure and scalar stress.’ InColin Renfrew, Michael Rowlands and Barbara A. Segraves-Whallon (eds), Theory and Explanation in Archaeology. New York: Academic Press, pp. 389–421.
Jones, Jana et al. 2014. ‘Evidence for prehistoric origins of Egyptianmummiﬁcation in Late Neolithic burials.’ PLoS ONE 9 (8): e103608.
Jones, Martin et al. 2011. ‘Food globalization in prehistory.’ World Archaeology 43 (4): 665–75.
Jordan, Peter et al. 2016. ‘Modelling the diffusion of pottery technologiesacross Afro-Eurasia: emerging insights and future research.’ Antiquity 90 (351): 590–603.
Jorgensen, Joseph G. 1980. Western Indians: Comparative Environments,Languages and Cultures of 172 Western American Indian Tribes. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Co. 
Jung, Carl G. 1958. The Undiscovered Self. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Kan, Sergei (ed.). 2001. Strangers to Relatives: The Adoption and Namingof Anthropologists in North America. Lincoln: University of NebraskaPress. 
Kanjou, Youssef et al. 2013. ‘Early human decapitation, 11,700–10,700 calBP, within the Pre-Pottery Neolithic village of Tell Qaramel, NorthSyria.’ International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 25 (5): 743–52.
Karahashi, Fumi. 2016. ‘Women and land in the Presargonic Laga.Corpus.’ In B. Lyon and C. Michel (eds), The Role of Women in Work and Society in the Ancient Near East. Boston and Berlin: De Gruyter, pp. 57–70. 
Karsten, Per and Bo Knarrström. 2001. ‘Tågerup – ﬁfteen hundred years ofMesolithic occupation in western Scania, Sweden: a preliminary view.’European Journal of Archaeology 4 (2): 165–74.
Kashina, E. and A. Zhulnikov. 2011. ‘Rods with elk heads: symbols in ritualcontext.’ Estonian Journal of Archaeology 15: 18–31. 
Kavanagh, Thomas M. 1994. ‘Reading the moment and the moment ofReading in Grafﬁgny’s Lettres d’une Péruvienne.’ Modern LanguageQuarterly 55 (2): 125–47.
Kehoe, Alice Beck. 2007. ‘Osage texts and Cahokia data.’ In F. Kent ReillyIII and James F. Garber (eds), Ancient Objects and Sacred Realms:Interpretations of Mississippian Iconography. Austin: University ofTexas Press, pp. 246–62.
Keightley, David N. 1999. ‘The Shang: China’s ﬁrst historical dynasty.’ In
M. Loewe and E. L. Shaughnessy (eds), pp. 232–91. 
Kelly, John E. 2008. ‘Contemplating Cahokia’s collapse.’ In Jim A. Raileyand Richard Martin Reycraft (eds), Global Perspectives on the Collapseof Complex Systems. Anthropological Papers no. 8. Albuquerque:Maxwell Museum of Anthropology.
Kelly, Raymond C. 2000. Warless Societies and the Origins of War. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Kelly, Robert L. 2013. The Lifeways of Hunter-Gatherers: The Foraging Spectrum. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kemp, Barry. 2006. Ancient Egypt: Anatomy of a Civilization (2nd edn).London: Routledge.
Kenoyer, J. M. 1992. ‘Harappan craft specialization and the question ofurban segregation and stratiﬁcation.’ The Eastern Anthropologist 45 (1–2): 39–54.
—. 1998. Ancient Cities of the Indus Valley. Karachi: Oxford UniversityPress. 
Kerig, T. 2003. ‘Von Gräbern und Stämmen: Zur Interpretationbandkeramischer Erdwerke.’ In U. Veit, T. L. Kienlin, C. Kümmel et al.(eds), Spuren und Botschaften: Interpretationen materieller Kultur. Münster: Waxmann, pp. 225–44.
Kidder, Tristram R. 2018. ‘Poverty Point.’ In Timothy R. Pauketat (ed.),The Oxford Handbook of North American Archaeology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 464–9.
Kilian, Klaus. 1988. ‘The emergence of wanax ideology in the Mycenaeanpalaces.’ Oxford Journal of Archaeology 7 (3): 291–302.
King, Adam. 2003. Etowah: The Political History of a Chiefdom Capital. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.
—. 2004. ‘Power and the sacred: Mound C and the Etowah chiefdom.’ In Richard F. Townsend and Robert V. Sharp (eds), Hero, Hawk, and OpenHand: American Indian Art of the Ancient Midwest and South. New Haven, CT: The Art Institute of Chicago, pp. 151–65.
—. 2007. ‘Mound C and the Southeastern ceremonial complex in thehistory of the Etowah site.’ In A. King (ed.), Southeastern Ceremonial Complex Chronology, Content, Context. Tuscaloosa, University of Alabama Press, pp. 107–33.
Kirch, Patrick V. 1990. ‘Specialization and exchange in the Lapita Complexof Oceania (1600–500 B.C.).’ Asian Perspectives 29 (2): 117–33. 
Kirleis, Wiebke and Marta Dal Corso. 2016. ‘Trypillian subsistenceeconomy: animal and plant exploitation.’ In Müller et al. (eds), pp. 195–206. 
Knight, Chris. 1991. Blood Relations. Menstruation and the Origins ofCulture. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
Knight, Vernon J. Jr. 1986. ‘The institutional organization of Mississippianreligion.’ American Antiquity 51: 675–87. 
—. 1989. ‘Some speculations on Mississippian monsters.’ In PatriciaGalloway (ed.), The Southeastern Ceremonial Complex: Artifacts and Analysis. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, pp. 205–10.
—. 2001. ‘Feasting and the emergence of platform mound ceremonialism inEastern North America.’ In Michael Dietler and Brian Hayden (eds),Feasts: Archaeological and Ethnographic Perspectives on Food, Politicsand Power. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, pp. 311–33.
—. 2006. ‘Symbolism of Mississippian mounds.’ In Gregory A. Waselkov,Peter H. Wood and Tom Hatley (eds), Powhatan’s Mantle: Indians in the Colonial Southeast (revised and expanded edn). Lincoln: NebraskaUniversity Press, pp. 421–34.
Kobayashi, Tatsuo. 2004. Jomon Reﬂections: Forager Life and Culture inthe Prehistoric Japanese Archipelago. Oxford: Oxbow. 
Koch, Alexander et al. 2019. ‘Earth system impacts of the European arrivaland Great Dying in the Americas after 1492.’ Quaternary ScienceReviews 207 (1): 13–36.
Köksal-Schmidt, Çi.dem and Klaus Schmidt. 2010. ‘The Göbekli Tepe“Totem Pole.” A ﬁrst discussion of an autumn 2010 discovery (PPN,Southeastern Turkey).’ Neo-Lithics 1 (10): 74–6.
Kolata, Alan. 1992. ‘In the realm of the Four Quarters.’ In Alvin M.Josephy (ed.), America in 1492. New York: Knopf, pp. 215–47.
—. 1997. ‘Of kings and capitals: principles of authority and the nature ofcities in the Native Andean state.’ In D. L. Nichols and T. H. Charlton (eds), The Archaeology of City States: Cross-Cultural Approaches.Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, pp. 245–54.
Kononenko, Nina et al. 2016. ‘Detecting early tattooing in the Paciﬁcregion through experimental usewear and residue analyses of obsidiantools.’ Journal of Archaeological Science, Reports 8: 147–63.
Kopenawa, Davi and Bruce Albert. 2013. The Falling Sky: Words of a Yanomami Shaman. London and Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press.
Kornienko, Tatiana V. 2015. ‘On the problem of human sacriﬁce inNorthern Mesopotamia in the Pre-Pottery Neolithic.’ Archaeology, Ethnology and Anthropology of Eurasia 43 (3): 42–9.
Kowaleski, Jeff. 2003. ‘Evidence for the functions and meanings of somenorthern Maya palaces.’ In J. J. Christie (ed.), Maya Palaces and EliteResidences. Austin: University of Texas Press, pp. 204–52.
Kristiansen, Kristian. 1993. ‘The strength of the past and its great might: anessay on the use of the past.’ Journal of European Archaeology 1 (1): 3–32. 
Kroeber, Alfred L. 1925. Handbook of the Indians of California. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 78. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
—. 1944. Conﬁgurations of Cultural Growth. Berkeley: University ofCalifornia Press. 
Kubler, George. 1962. The Shape of Time. Remarks on the History of Things. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
Kuijt, Ian. 1996. ‘Negotiating equality through ritual: a consideration ofLate Natuﬁan and Prepottery Neolithic A period mortuary practices.’Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 15: 313–36. 
Kuper, Rudoplh and Stefan Kroepelin. 2006. ‘Climate-controlled Holoceneoccupation in the Sahara: motor of Africa’s evolution’. Science 313: 803– 7. 
La Flesche, Francis. 1921. ‘The Osage tribe: rite of the chiefs: sayings ofthe ancient men.’ Thirty-sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology (1914–15), pp. 35–604. Washington.
—. 1930. ‘The Osage tribe: rite of the Wa-xo’-be.’ Forty-ﬁfth AnnualReport of the Bureau of American Ethnology (1927–28), pp. 529–833.Washington.
—. 1939. War Ceremony and Peace Ceremony of the Osage Indians.Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 101. Washington: USGovernment. 
Lagrou, Els. 2009. Arte Indígena no Brasil: Agência, Alteridade e Relação.Belo Horizonte: C/Arte.
Lahontan, Louis Armand de Lom d’Arce (ed. Réal Ouellet and AlainBeaulieu). 1990 [1702a]. Mémoires de l’Amérique septentrionale, ou lasuite des voyages de Mr. le Baron de Lahontan. Montreal: Presses de l’Université de Montréal. 
—. (ed. Réal Ouellet and Alain Beaulieu). 1990 [1702b]. Nouveaux Voyages de Mr. Le Baron de Lahontan, dans l’Amérique Septentrionale. Montreal: Presses de l’Université de Montréal. 
—. (ed. Réal Ouellet and Alain Beaulieu).1990 [1703]. Supplément auxVoyages du Baron de Lahontan, ou l’on trouve des dialogues curieuxentre l’auteur et un sauvage de bon sens qui a voyagé. Montreal: Presses de l’Université de Montréal. 
—. 1735. New Voyages to North America Giving a Full Account of theCustoms, Commerce, Religion, and Strange Opinions of the Savages ofThat Country, With Political Remarks upon the Courts of Portugal andDenmark, and the Present State of the Commerce of Those Countries. London: J. Walthoe. 
Lang, Caroline et al. 2013. ‘Gazelle behaviour and human presence at earlyNeolithic Göbekli Tepe, south-east Anatolia.’ World Archaeology 45: 410–29. 
Langley, Michelle C., Christopher Clarkson and Sean Ulm. 2008.‘Behavioural complexity in Eurasian Neanderthal populations: achronological examination of the archaeological evidence.’ CambridgeArchaeological Journal 18 (3): 289–307.
Lansing, J. Stephen. 1991. Priests and Programmers: Technologies ofPower in the Engineered Landscapes of Bali. Princeton, NJ: PrincetonUniversity Press.
Larson, Greger. et al. 2007. ‘Ancient DNA, pig domestication, and thespread of the Neolithic into Europe.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104: 15276–81. 
Larsson, Lars. 1990. ‘The Mesolithic of southern Scandinavia.’ Journal of World Prehistory 4 (3): 257–309.
Lattas, Andrew. 2006. ‘The utopian promise of government.’ The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 12 (1): 129–50.
Lattimore, Owen. 1962. Studies in Frontier History. Collected Papers1929–58. London: Oxford University Press.
Lazarovici, Cornelia-Magda. 2010. ‘Cucuteni ceramics: technology,typology, evolution, and aesthetics.’ In Anthony (ed.). pp. 128–61.
Le Guin, Ursula K. 1993 [1973]. The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas.Mankato, MN: Creative Education.
Leach, Edmund. 1976. Culture and Communication. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press. 
Leacock, Eleanor. 1978. ‘Women’s status in egalitarian society:implications for social evolution.’ Current Anthropology 19: 247–76. 
Lee, Richard B. and Irven DeVore (eds). 1968. Man the Hunter. Chicago:Aldine. 
Lehner, Mark. 2015. ‘Labor and the pyramids. The Heit el-Ghurab“workers town” at Giza.’ In Steinkeller and Hudson (eds), pp. 397–522.
Lepper, Bradley T. 1995. ‘Tracking Ohio’s Great Hopewell Road.’Archaeology 48 (6): 52–6.
Lesure, Richard. 1998. ‘The constitution of inequality in Yurok society.’Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology 20 (2): 171–94.
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. 1963. ‘Do dual organizations exist?’ In C. Lévi-Strauss, Structural Anthropology. Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 132–63.
—. 1966. The Savage Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—. 1967 [1944]. ‘The social and psychological aspects of chieftainship in aprimitive tribe: the Nambikwara of northwestern Mato Grosso.’ In R.Cohen and J. Middleton (eds), Comparative Political Systems. Austin and London: University of Texas Press, pp. 45–62.
—. 1982 [1976]. The Way of the Masks. Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
—. 1987. Anthropology and Myth: Lectures 1951–1982. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Levy, Philip A. 1996. ‘Exemplars of taking liberties: the Iroquois inﬂuencethesis and the problem of evidence.’ William and Mary Quarterly 53 (3):587–604. 
Li, Jaang, Zhouyong Sun, Jing Shao and Min Li. 2018. ‘When peripherieswere centres: a preliminary study of the Shimao-centred polity in theloess highland, China.’ Antiquity 92 (364): 1008–22.
Lightfoot, Kent G. and Otis Parrish. 2009. Californian Indians and their Environment. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lincoln, Charles K. 1994. ‘Structural and philological evidence for divinekingship at Chichén Itzá, Yucatan, México.’ In Hanns J. Prem (ed.),Hidden Among the Hills. Acta Mesoamericana, vol. 7. Möckmühl: Verlagvon Flemming, pp. 164–96.
Lipson, M. et al. 2017. ‘Parallel palaeogenomic transects reveal complexgenetic history of early European farmers.’ Nature 551: 368–72. 
Liu, Li and Xingcan Chen. 2012. The Archaeology of China: From the LatePaleolithic to the Early Bronze Age. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. 
Liverani, Mario (ed. and transl. Z. Bahrani and M. Van De Mieroop). 1998.Uruk. The First City. Shefﬁeld: Equinox.
Lockhart, James. 1985. ‘Some Nahua concepts in postconquest guise.’History of European Ideas 6 (4): 465–82.
Lockhart, James, Frances Berdan and Arthur J. O. Anderson. 1986. The Tlaxcalan Actas: A Compendium of the Records of the Cabildo ofTlaxcala (1545–1627). Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Loeb, Edwin M. 1931. ‘The religious organizations of North-CentralCalifornia and Tierra del Fuego.’ American Anthropologist 33 (4): 517–56. 
Loewe, Michael and Edward. L. Shaughnessy (eds). 1999. The CambridgeHistory of Ancient China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lombardo, Umberto et al. 2020. ‘Early Holocene crop cultivation andlandscape modiﬁcation in Amazonia.’ Nature 581 (2020): 190–93.
Lorenz, Karl G. 1997. ‘A re-examination of Natchez sociopoliticalcomplexity: a view from the grand village and beyond.’ Southeastern Archaeology 16 (2): 97–112.
Lovejoy, Arthur O. and George Boas. 1935. Primitivism and Related Ideas in Antiquity. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Lowie, Robert H. 1928. ‘Incorporeal property in primitive society.’ Yale Law Journal 37 (5): 551–63.
—. 1948. ‘Some aspects of political organisation among the AmericanAborigines.’ Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of GreatBritain and Ireland 78: 11–24. 
McBrearty, Sally and Alison S. Brooks. 2000. ‘The revolution that wasn’t: anew interpretation of the origin of modern human behaviour.’ Journal of Human Evolution 39: 453–563. 
MacCormack, Carol P. and Marilyn Strathern (eds). 1980. Nature, Culture, and Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McGregor, Gaile. 1988. The Noble Savage in the New World Garden: NotesToward a Syntactics of Place. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
McIntosh, Roderick. 2005. Ancient Middle Niger: Urbanism and the Self-Organizing Past. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McIntosh, Susan Keech. 2009. Beyond Chiefdoms: Pathways to Complexityin Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MacLachlan, Colin M. 1991. Spain’s Empire in the New World: The Role ofIdeas in Institutional and Social Change. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
MacLeod, William C. 1928. ‘Economic aspects of indigenous Americanslavery.’ American Anthropologist 30 (4): 632–50.
—. 1929. ‘The origin of servile labor groups.’ American Anthropologist 31 (1): 89–113.
MacPherson, C. B. 1962. The Political Theory of Possessive Individualism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Madgwick, Richard et al. 2019. ‘Multi-isotope analysis reveals that feasts inthe Stonehenge environs and across Wessex drew people and animalsfrom throughout Britain.’ Science Advances 5 (3): eaau6078.
Maeda, Osamu et al. 2016. ‘Narrowing the harvest: increasing sickleinvestment and the rise of domesticated cereal agriculture in the FertileCrescent.’ Quaternary Science Reviews 145: 226–37. 
Maine, Henry Sumner. 1893 [1875]. Lectures on the Early History of Institutions. London: John Murray.
Malinowski, Bronis.aw. 1922. Argonauts of the Western Paciﬁc: AnAccount of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes ofMelanesian New Guinea. London: Routledge.
Mann, Barbara Alice. 1997. ‘The lynx in time: Haudenosaunee women’straditions and history.’ American Indian Quarterly 21 (3): 423–50.
—. 1998. ‘Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) women, legal and political status.’ InBruce Elliott Johansen (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Native American LegalTradition. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, pp. 112–31. 
—. 2000. Iroquoian Women: The Gantowisas. New York: Peter Lang.
—. 2001. ‘Are you delusional? Kandiaronk on Christianity.’ In B. A. Mann(ed.), Native American Speakers of the Eastern Woodlands: SelectedSpeeches and Critical Analysis. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, pp. 35– 82. 
Mann, Barbara A. and Jerry L. Fields. 1997. ‘A sign in the sky: dating theLeague of the Haudenosaunee.’ American Indian Culture and Research Journal 21 (2): 105–63.
Mann, Charles C. 2005. 1491: The Americas before Columbus. London: Granta. 
Mann, Michael. 1986. The Sources of Social Power, vol. 1: A History ofPower from the Beginning to AD 1760. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. 
Manning, Joseph G. 2003. Land and Power in Ptolemaic Egypt: TheStructure of Land Tenure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Manzanilla, Linda R. 1993. ‘Daily life in Teotihuacan apartmentcompounds.’ In Berrin and Pasztory (eds), pp. 90–99.
—. 1996. ‘Corporate groups and domestic activities at Teotihuacan.’ Latin American Antiquity 7 (3): 228–46.
—. 2015. ‘Cooperation and tensions in multi-ethnic corporate societiesusing Teotihuacan, Central Mexico, as a case study.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (30): 9210–15.
—. 2017. ‘Discussion: the subsistence of the Teotihuacan metropolis.’Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 9: 133–40. 
Manzura, Igor. 2005. ‘Steps to the steppe: or, how the North Pontic regionwas colonised.’ Oxford Journal of Archaeology 24(4): 313–38.
Marchesi, Gianni. 2004. ‘Who was buried in the royal tombs of Ur? Theepigraphic and textual data.’ Orientalia 73 (2): 153–97.
Marean, Curtis. W. 2014. ‘The origins and signiﬁcance of coastal resourceuse in Africa and Western Eurasia.’ Journal of Human Evolution 77: 17– 40. 
Martin, Simon. 2001. ‘The power in the west: the Maya and Teotihuacan.’In Grube et al. (eds), pp. 98–113.
—. 2020. Ancient Maya Politics: A Political Anthropology of the ClassicPeriod 150–900 CE. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martin, Simon and Nikolai Grube. 2000. Chronicle of the Maya Kings andQueens: Deciphering the Dynasties of the Ancient Maya. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Matar, Nabil. 2009. Europe Through Arab Eyes, 1578–1727. New York: Columbia University Press.
Matsui, Akira and Masaaki Kanehara. 2006. ‘The question of prehistoricplant husbandry during the Jomon period in Japan.’ World Archaeology 38 (2): 259–73.
Matthews, Wendy. 2005. ‘Micromorphological and microstratigraphictraces of uses and concepts of space.’ In Ian Hodder (ed.), InhabitingÇatalhöyük: Reports from the 1995–1999 Seasons. Cambridge:McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, British Institute ofArchaeology at Ankara, pp. 355–98.
Mauss, Marcel. 1968–9. Oeuvres, vols 1–3. Paris: Éditions de Minuit. 
—. 2016 [1925]. The Gift (expanded edn, selected, annotated and transl.Jane I. Guyer). Chicago: HAU Books.
Mauss, Marcel and Henri Beuchat. 1979 [1904–5]. Seasonal Variations of the Eskimo: A Study in Social Morphology. London: Routledge.
Maybury-Lewis, David (ed.). 1979. Dialectical Societies: The Gê and Bororo of Central Brazil. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Meek, Ronald. 1976. Social Sciences and the Ignoble Savage. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Meillassoux, Claude (transl. Alide Dasnois). 1996. The Anthropology of Slavery: The Womb of Iron and Gold. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress. 
Mellaart, James. 1967. Çatal Hüyük: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Mellars, Paul et al. (eds). 2007. Rethinking the Human Revolution: NewBehavioural and Biological Perspectives on the Origin and Dispersal ofModern Humans. Cambridge: McDonald Institute.
Meller, Harald and Michael Scheﬁk. 2015. Krieg: Eine Archäologische Spurensuche. Halle (Saale): Landesmuseum für Vorgeschichte.
Menotti, Francesco and Aleksey G. Korvin-Piotrovskiy (eds). 2012. The Tripolye Culture. Giant-Settlements in Ukraine. Formation, Developmentand Decline. Oxford: Oxbow Books. 
Merrick, Jeffrey. 1991. ‘Patriarchalism and constitutionalism in eighteenth-century parliamentary discourse.’ Studies in Eighteenth-Century Culture 20: 317–30. 
Meskell, Lynn, Carolyn Nakamura, Rachel King and Shahina Farid. 2008.‘Figured lifeworlds and depositional practices at Çatalhöyük.’Cambridge Archaeological Journal 18 (2): 139–61.
Mieroop, Marc Van De. 1989. ‘Women in the economy of Sumer.’ In B. S.Lesko (ed.), Women’s Earliest Records: Western Asia and Egypt. Atlanta,GA: Scholars Press, pp. 53–66.
—. 1997. The Ancient Mesopotamian City. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress. 
—. 1999. ‘The government of an ancient Mesopotamian city: what weknow and why we know so little.’ In K. Watanabe (ed.), Priests and Ofﬁcials in the Ancient Near East. Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag C. Winter, pp. 139–61. 
—. 2013. ‘Democracy and the rule of law, the assembly, and the ﬁrst lawcode.’ In Crawford (ed.), pp. 277–89.
Migliano, Andrea et al. 2017. ‘Characterization of hunter-gatherer networksand implications for cumulative culture.’ Nature Human Behaviour 1 (2):43. 
Miller, Daniel. 1985. ‘Ideology and the Harappan civilization.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 4: 34–71. 
Miller, Heather. M. L. 2000. ‘Reassessing the urban structure of Harappa:evidence from craft production distribution.’ South Asian Archaeology (1997), pp. 207–47.
Miller, Joaquin. 1873. Life Amongst the Modocs: Unwritten History.London: Richard Bentley and Son.
Miller, Mary Ellen and Stephen D. Houston. 1987. ‘The classic Mayaballgame and its architectural setting.’ RES 14: 47–65. 
Millon, René. 1964. ‘The Teotihuacan mapping project.’ American Antiquity 29 (3): 345–52.
—. 1970. ‘Teotihuacan: completion of map of giant ancient city in theValley of Mexico.’ Science 170: 1077–82. 
—. 1976. ‘Social relations at ancient Teotihuacan.’ In E. Wolf (ed.), The Valley of Mexico: Studies in Pre-Hispanic Ecology and Society. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, pp. 205–48.
—. 1988. ‘Where do they all come from? The provenance of the Wagnermurals at Teotihuacan.’ In Berrin (ed.), pp. 16–43.
—. 1993. ‘The place where time began: an archaeologist’s interpretation ofwhat happened in Teotihuacan history.’ In Berrin and Pasztory (eds), pp.16–43. 
Milner, George R. 1998. The Cahokia Chiefdom: The Archaeology of a Mississippian Society. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Milner, George R., George Chaplin and Emily Zavodny. 2013. ‘Conﬂict andsocietal change in Late Prehistoric Eastern North America.’ EvolutionaryAnthropology 22(3): 96–102.
Mitchell, Donald. 1985. ‘A demographic proﬁle of Northwest Coastslavery.’ In M. Thompson, M. T. Garcia and F. J. Kense (eds), Status,Structure and Stratiﬁcation: Current Archaeological Reconstructions. Calgary, Alberta: Archaeological Association of the University ofCalgary, pp. 227–36. 
Mithen, Steven. J. 2003. After the Ice: A Global Human History 20,000–5000 BC. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 
Mittnik, Alissa et al. 2016. ‘A molecular approach to the sexing of the tripleburial at the Upper Paleolithic site of Dolní V.stonice.’ PLoS ONE 11 (10): e0163019.
Moore, Andrew M. T. and Gordon C. Hillman. 1992. ‘The Pleistocene toHolocene transition and human economy in Southwest Asia: the impactof the Younger Dryas.’ American Antiquity 57 (3): 482–94.
Moorey, P. R. S. 1964. ‘The “Plano-Convex Building” at Kish and EarlyMesopotamian Palaces.’ Iraq 26 (2): 83–98.
—. 1977. ‘What do we know about the people buried in the royalcemetery?’ Expedition 20 (1): 24–40.
Moreno García, Juan Carlos. 2014. ‘Recent developments in the social andeconomic history of Ancient Egypt.’ Journal of Ancient Near Eastern History 1 (2): 231–61.
Morgan, Lewis Henry. 1851. League of the Ho-de-no-sau-nee, or Iroquois. New York: Dodd, Mead and Co.
—. 1877. Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress,from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization. New York: Henry Holt and Co. 
Morphy, Howard. 1991. Ancestral Connections: Art and an AboriginalSystem of Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Morris, Craig and Adriana von Hagen. 2011. The Incas: Lords of the Four Quarters. London: Thames and Hudson. 
Morris, Ellen. 2007. ‘Sacriﬁce for the state: First Dynasty royal funeralsand the rites at Macramallah’s triangle.’ In Nicola Laneri (ed.),Performing Death: Social Analysis of Funerary Traditions in the AncientNear East and Mediterranean. Chicago: Oriental Institute of Chicago,pp. 15–38.
—. 2014. ‘(Un)dying loyalty: meditations on retainer sacriﬁce in ancientEgypt and elsewhere.’ In Campbell (ed.), pp. 61–93.
Morris, Ian. 2015. Foragers, Farmers, and Fossil Fuels: How HumanValues Evolve. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Moss, Madonna. 1993. ‘Shellﬁsh, gender, and status on the NorthwestCoast: reconciling archaeological, ethnographic, and ethnohistoricalrecords of the Tlingit.’ American Anthropologist 95 (3): 631–52. 
Motolinía, Fr. Toribio de Benavente. 1914 [1541]. Historia de los Indios de la Neuva España. Barcelona: Herederos de Juan Gili. 
Muhlberger, Steven and Phil Pain. 1996. ‘Democracy’s place in worldhistory.’ Journal of World History 4 (1): 23–45.
Müller, Johannes. 2016. ‘Human structure, social space: what we can learnfrom Trypyllia.’ In Müller et al. (eds), pp. 301–4.
Müller, Johannes et al. 2016. ‘Chronology and demography: how manypeople lived in a mega-site.’ In Müller et al. (eds), pp. 133–70.
Müller, Johannes, Knut Rassmann and Mykhailo Videiko (eds). 2016.Trypillia Mega-Sites and European Prehistory, 4100–3400 BCE. London and New York: Routledge.
Murdock, George P. 1937. ‘Comparative data on the division of labour bysex.’ Social Forces 15: 551–3. 
Murdock, George P. and Caterina Provost. 1973. ‘Factors in the division oflabour by sex: a cross-cultural analysis.’ Ethnology 12: 203–26. 
Murra, John Victor. 1956. The Economic Organization of the Inca State.Chicago: Department of Anthropology. PhD dissertation, republished asThe Economic Organization of the Inka State by JAI Press, Stamford, CT1980).
—. 1982. ‘The Mit’a obligations of ethnic groups to the Inka state.’ In G.Collier, R. Rosaldo and J. Wirth (eds), The Inca and Aztec States, 1400–1800. New York: Academic Press, pp. 237–62.
Muthu, Sankar. 2003. Enlightenment Against Empire. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Nabokov, Peter. 1996. ‘Native views of history.’ In Bruce G. Trigger andWilcomb E. Washburn (eds), The Cambridge History of the NativePeoples of the Americas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–60. 
Nash, June. 1978. ‘The Aztecs and the ideology of male dominance.’ Signs4 (2): 349–62.
Nebbia, Marco et al. 2018. ‘The making of Chalcolithic assembly places:Trypillia megasites as materialized consensus among equal strangers?’World Archaeology 50: 41–61. 
Neitzel, Robert S. 1965. Archaeology of the Fatherland Site: The Grand Village of the Natchez. New York: American Museum of Natural History. 
—. 1972. The Grand Village of the Natchez Revisited: Excavations at theFatherland Site, Adams County, Mississippi. New York: American 
Museum of Natural History.
Neumann, Hans et al. 2014. Krieg und Frieden im Alten Vorderasien. Münster: Ugarit-Verlag.
Nichols, Deborah L. 2016. ‘Teotihuacan.’ Journal of Archaeological Research 24: 1–74. 
Nieboer, Herman J. 1900. Slavery as an Industrial System: EthnologicalResearches. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Nilsson Stutz, L. 2010. ‘A Baltic way of death? A tentative exploration ofidentity in Mesolithic cemetery practices.’ In Å.M. Larsson and L.Papmehl-Dufay (eds), Uniting Sea II; Stone Age Societies in the BalticSea Region. Borgholm: Uppsala University.
Nisbet, Robert A. 1966. The Sociological Tradition. London: Heineman. 
Nissen, Hans. 2002. ‘Uruk: key site of the period and key site of theproblem.’ In N. Postgate (ed.), Artefacts of Complexity: Tracking the Uruk in the Near East. London: British School of Archaeology in Iraq,pp. 1–16.
Nissen, Hans, Peter Damerow and Robert Englund. 1993. Archaic Bookkeeping: Early Writing and Techniques of Economic Administrationin the Ancient Near East. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Noble, William C. 1978. ‘The Neutral Indians.’ In William Englebrecht andDonald Grayson (eds), Essays in Northeastern Anthropology in Memory of Marian E. White. Occasional publication in NortheasternAnthropology 5. Department of Anthropology, Franklin Pierce College,Rindge, pp. 152–64.
—. 1985. ‘Tsouharissen’s chiefdom: an early historic 17th Century NeutralIroquoian ranked society.’ Canadian Journal of Archaeology/Journal Canadien d’Archéologie 9 (2): 131–46.
Noddings, Nel. 1984. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Notroff, Jens, Oliver Dietrich and Klaus Schmidt. 2016. ‘Gathering of thedead? The early Neolithic sanctuaries at Göbekli Tepe, southeasternTurkey.’ In Colin Renfrew, Michael J. Boyd and Iain Morley (eds), Death Rituals, Social Order, and the Archaeology of Immortality in the AncientWorld. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 65–81.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2011. Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Nuttall, Zelia. 1921. ‘Francisco Cervantes de Salazar. Biographical notes.’Journal de la Société des Américanistes 13 (1): 59–90.
O’Curry, Eugene. 1873. On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish. London: Williams and Norgate.
O’Meara, Walter. 1968. Daughters of the Country. New York: Harcourt, Brace. 
O’Shea, John and Marek Zvelebil. 1984. ‘Oleneostrovski Mogilnik:reconstructing the social and economic organization of prehistoricforagers in Northern Russia.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 3: 1–40. 
Oates, Joan et al. 2007. ‘Early Mesopotamian urbanism: a new view fromthe north.’ Antiquity 81 (313): 585–600.
Ohlrau, René et al. 2016. ‘Living on the edge? Carrying capacities ofTrypillian settlements in the Buh-Dnipro Interﬂuve.’ In Müller et al.(eds), 2016, pp. 207–20.
Oppenheim, A. Leo. 1977. Ancient Mesopotamia: Portrait of a DeadCivilization. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press.
Ostrom, Elinor. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution ofInstitutions for Collective Action. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. 
Ott, Sandra. 1981. The Circle of Mountains: A Basque Shepherding Community. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Ouellet, Réal. 1990. ‘Jésuites et philosophes lecteurs de Lahontan.’ Saggi ericerche di letteratura francese 29: 119–64. 
—. 1995. ‘A la découverte de Lahontan.’ Dix-Huitième Siècle 27: 323–33. 
Owen, Linda R. 1994. ‘Gender, crafts, and the reconstruction of tool use.’Helinium 34: 186–200. 
—. 1996. ‘Der Gebrauch von Pﬂanzen in Jungpaläolithikum Mitteleuropas.’Ethnographisch-Archäologische Zeitschrift 37: 119–46.
Özbek Metin. 1988. ‘Culte des cranes humains a Çayönü.’ Anatolica 15: 127–37. 
—. 1992. ‘The human remains at Çayönü.’ American Journal of Archaeology 96 (2): 374.
Özkaya, Vecihi and Aytaç Co.kun. 2009. ‘Körtik Tepe, a new Pre-PotteryNeolithic A site in south-eastern Anatolia.’ Antiquity 83 (320).
Pagden, Anthony. 1982. The Fall of Natural Man: The American Indian and the Origins of Comparative Ethnology. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
—. 1983. ‘The savage critic: some European images of the primitive.’ The Yearbook of English Studies 13 (Colonial and Imperial Themes specialnumber): 32–45.
—. 1993. European Encounters with the New World: From Renaissance toRomanticism. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
Parker, Arthur C. 1912. The Code of Handsome Lake, the Seneca Prophet. New York State Museum Bulletin 163, Education Department Bulletin
530. Albany: University of the State of New York.
—. 1916. The Constitution of the Five Nations, or the Iroquois Book of theGreat Law. New York State Museum Bulletin 184. Albany: University ofthe State of New York. 
—. 1919. The Life of General Ely S. Parker, Last Grand Sachem of theIroquois and General Grant’s Military Secretary. Buffalo Historical Society Publications 23. Buffalo, NY: Buffalo Historical Society.
Parker Pearson, Mike (and the Stonehenge Riverside Project). 2012.Stonehenge: Exploring the Greatest Stone Age Mystery. London: Simon and Schuster. 
Pärssinen, Martti et al. 2009. ‘Pre-Columbian geometric earthworks in theupper Purús: a complex society in western Amazonia.’ Antiquity 83: 1084–95. 
Pascoe, Bruce. 2014. Dark Emu: Aboriginal Australia and the Birth ofAgriculture. London: Scribe. Pasztory, Esther. 1988. ‘A reinterpretation of Teotihuacan and its muralpainting tradition.’ In Berrin (ed.), pp. 45–77.—. 1992. ‘Abstraction and the rise of a utopian state at Teotihuacan.’ In J.
C. Berlo (ed.), Art, Ideology, and the City of Teotihuacan. Washington:Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, pp. 281–320.—. 1997. Teotihuacan. An Experiment in Living. Norman: University ofOklahoma Press. Patterson, Orlando. 1982. Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Pauketat, Timothy R. 1994. The Ascent of Chiefs: Cahokia and Mississippian Politics in Native North America. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press. 
—. 2004. Ancient Cahokia and the Mississippians. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press. 
—. 2007. Chiefdoms and Other Archaeological Delusions. Lanham, MD:AltaMira Press. 
—. 2009. Cahokia: Ancient America’s Great City on the Mississippi. Penguin Library of American Indian History. New York: Viking.
—. 2013. An Archaeology of the Cosmos: Rethinking Agency and Religionin Ancient Times. London: Routledge.
Pauketat, Timothy R. and Thomas E. Emerson (eds). 1997. Cahokia: Domination and Ideology in the Mississippian World. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Pauketat, Timothy R., Susan M. Alt and Jeffery D. Kruchten. 2015. ‘City ofearth and wood: New Cahokia and its material-historical implications.’ InNorman Yoffee (ed.), The Cambridge World History. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, pp. 437–54.
Paulinyi, Zoltán. 1981. ‘Capitals in pre-Aztec Central Mexico.’ Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 35 (2/3): 315–50.
Pearson, Jessica et al. 2013. ‘Food and social complexity at Çayönü Tepesi,southeastern Anatolia: stable isotope evidence of differentiation in dietaccording to burial practice and sex in the early Neolithic.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 32 (2): 180–89.
Pennington, B. et al. 2016. ‘Emergence of civilization, changes in ﬂuvio.deltaic style and nutrient redistribution forced by Holocene seal-levelrise.’ Geoarchaeology 31: 194–210. 
Peters, Joris et al. 2017. ‘The emergence of livestock husbandry in EarlyNeolithic Anatolia.’ In U. Albarella et al. (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Zooarchaeology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 247–65.
Peterson, Jane. 2016. ‘Woman’s share in Neolithic society: a view from theSouthern Levant.’ Near Eastern Archaeology 79 (3): 132–9.
Pettitt, Paul. 2011. The Palaeolithic Origins of Human Burial. London: Routledge.
Pfaffenberger, Bryan. 1988. ‘Fetishised objects and humanised nature:towards an anthropology of technology.’ Man (N.S.) 23 (2): 236–52.
Piccaluga, Giulia. 1977. ‘Adonis, i cacciatori falliti e l’avventodell’agricoltura.’ In Bruno Gentili and Giuseppe Paioni (eds), Il mito greco. Rome: Edizioni dell’Ateneo, Bizzarri, pp. 33–48.
Pilling, Arnold R. 1989. ‘Yurok Aristocracy and “Great Houses”.’American Indian Quarterly 13 (4): 421–36. 
Pinette, Susan. 2006. ‘The importance of the literary: Lahontan’s dialoguesand primitivist thought.’ Prose Studies 28 (1): 41–53.
Pinker, Steven. 2012. The Better Angels of Our Nature: A History ofViolence and Humanity. London: Penguin.
—. 2018. Enlightenment Now: The Case for Science, Reason, Humanismand Progress. London: Allen Lane. 
Piperno, Dolores R. 2011. ‘The origins of plant cultivation anddomestication in the new world tropics: patterns, process, and newdevelopments.’ Current Anthropology 52 (4): 453–70.
Plunket, Patricia and Gabriela Uruñuela. 2005. ‘Recent research in Pueblaprehistory.’ Journal of Archaeological Research 13 (2): 89–127.
—. 2006. ‘Social and cultural consequences of a late Holocene eruption ofPopocatépetl in central Mexico.’ Quarternary International 151 (1): 19–28. 
Pomeau, René. 1967. Voyages et lumières dans la littérature française du XVIIIe siècle. SVEC LVII 22: 1269–89. 
Pool, Christopher A. 2007. Olmec Archaeology and Early Mesoamerica.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Possehl, G. L. 1996. Indus Age: The Writing System. Philadelphia:University of Pennsylvania Press.
—. 2002. The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Postgate, Nicholas. 1992. Early Mesopotamia: Society and Economy at theDawn of History. London: Routledge.
Pournelle, Jennifer. 2003. Marshland of Cities: Deltaic Landscapes and theEvolution of Mesopotamian Civilization. San Diego: University ofCalifornia. 
Powell, Adam, Shennan Stephen and Mark G. Thomas. 2009. ‘LatePleistocene demography and the appearance of modern humanbehaviour.’ Science 324: 1298–301. 
Powell, Marvin A (ed.). 1987. Labor in the Ancient Near East. New Haven,CT: American Oriental Society.
Powers, Stephen. 1877. Tribes of California. Washington: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Prendergast, Amy L., Alexander J. E. Pryor, Hazel Reade and Rhiannon E.Stevens. 2018. ‘Seasonal records of palaeoenvironmental change and 
resource use from archaeological assemblages.’ Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 21.
Preziosi, Donald and Louise A. Hitchcock. 1999. Aegean Art andArchitecture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Provinse, John. 1937. ‘Plains Indian culture.’ In Fred Eggan (ed.), Social Anthropology of North American Tribes. Chicago: University of ChicagoPress. 
Pryor, Alexander J. E. et al. 2020. ‘The chronology and function of a newcircular mammoth-bone structure at Kostenki 11.’ Antiquity 94 (374):323–41. 
Quilter, Jeffrey. 2002. ‘Moche politics, religion, and warfare.’ Journal of World Prehistory 16 (2): 145–95.
Ranere, Anthony J. et al. 2009. ‘The cultural and chronological context ofearly Holocene maize and squash domestication in the Central BalsasRiver Valley, Mexico.’ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (13): 5014.
Ratnagar, Shereen. 2004. Trading Encounters: From the Euphrates to theIndus in the Bronze Age. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
—. 2016. Harappan Archaeology: Early State Perspectives. Delhi: Primus Books. 
Redding, Richard W. 1998. ‘Ancestoral pigs: a New (Guinea) model for pigdomestication in the Middle East.’ MASCA Research Papers in Science and Archaeology 15: 65–76. 
Rehak, Paul. 2002. ‘Imag(in)ing a women’s world in Bronze Age Greece.’In Nancy Sorkin Rabinowitz and Lisa Auanger (eds), Among Womenfrom the Homosocial to the Homoerotic in the Ancient World. Austin: University of Texas Press, pp. 34–59.
Reich, David, Richard E. Green et al. 2010. ‘Genetic history of an archaichominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia.’ Nature 468 (7327):1053. 
Renfrew, Colin. 1972. The Emergence of Civilization: The Cyclades and theAegean in the Third Millennium BC. London: Methuen. 
—. 1987. Archaeology and Language: The Puzzle of Indo-EuropeanOrigins. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—. 2007. Prehistory: The Making of the Human Mind. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. 
Renfrew, Colin and Bin Liu. 2018. ‘The emergence of complex society inChina: the case of Liangzhu.’ Antiquity 92 (364): 975–90.
Renger, Johannes M. 1995. ‘Institutional, communal, and individualownership or possession of arable land in ancient Mesopotamia from theend of the fourth to the end of the ﬁrst millennium BC.’ Chicago-KentLaw Review 71 (1): 269–319.
Reynolds, Natasha and Felix Riede. 2019. ‘House of cards: culturaltaxonomy and the study of the European Upper Palaeolithic.’ Antiquity371: 1350–58. 
Richardson, Seth. 2012. ‘Early Mesopotamia: the presumptive state.’ Past and Present 215: 3–49. 
Richerson, Peter J. and Robert Boyd. 2001. ‘Institutional evolution in theHolocene: the rise of complex societies.’ Proceedings of the British Academy 110: 197–234. 
Richerson, Peter J., Robert Boyd and Robert L. Bettinger. 2001. ‘Wasagriculture impossible during the Pleistocene but mandatory during theHolocene? A climate change hypothesis.’ American Antiquity 66 (3):387–411. 
Richter, Daniel K. 1972. ‘Lahontan dans l’Encyclopédie et ses suites.’ InJacques Proust (ed.), Recherches nouvelles sur quelques écrivains des Lumières. Geneva: Librairie Droz, pp. 163–200.
—. 1992. The Ordeal of the Longhouse: The Peoples of the Iroquois Leaguein the Era of European Colonization. Chapel Hill: University of NorthCarolina Press. 
Rick, John W. 2017. ‘The nature of ritual space at Chavín de Huántar.’ InSilvana Rosenfeld and Stefanie L. Bautista (eds), Rituals of the Past: Prehispanic and Colonial Case Studies in Andean Archaeology. Boulder: University Press of Colorado, pp. 21–50.
Ringle, William A. 2004. ‘On the political organization of Chichen Itza.’Ancient Mesoamerica 15: 167–218. 
Rissman, Paul. 1988. ‘Public displays and private values: a guide to buriedwealth in Harappan archaeology.’ World Archaeology 20: 209–28. 
Ritchie, Morgan, Dana Lepofsky et al. 2016. ‘Beyond culture history: CoastSalish settlement patterning and demography in the Fraser Valley, BC.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 43: 140–54. 
Rodrigues, Teresa. 2005. ‘Gender and social differentiation within theTurner Population, Ohio, as evidenced by activity-induced 
musculoskeletal stress markers.’ In Carr and Case (eds), pp. 405–27.
Roebroeks, Wil et al. 2000. Hunters of the Golden Age: The Mid-UpperPalaeolithic of Eurasia 30,000–20,00 BP. Leiden: University of LeidenPress. 
Rollings, Willard H. 1992. The Osage: An Ethnohistorical Study ofHegemony on the Prairie-Plains. Columbia: University of MissouriPress. 
Roosevelt, Anna. 2013. ‘The Amazon and the Anthropocene: 13,000 yearsof human inﬂuence in a tropical rainforest.’ Anthropocene 4: 69–87. 
Rosenwig, Robert M. 2010. The Beginnings of Mesoamerican Civilization:Inter-Regional Interaction and the Olmec. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press.
—. 2017. ‘Olmec globalization: a Mesoamerican archipelago ofcomplexity.’ In Tamar Hodos (ed.), The Routledge Handbook ofArchaeology and Globalization. London: Routledge, pp. 177–93.
Roth, Anne Macy. 1991. Egyptian Phyles in the Old Kingdom: TheEvolution of a System of Social Organization. Chicago: Oriental Institute.
—. 2002. ‘The meaning of menial labour: “servant statues” in Old Kingdomserdabs.’ Journal of the American Research Center in Egypt 39: 103–21. 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (transl. Maurice Cranston). 1984 [1754]. A Discourse on Inequality. London: Penguin.
Rowe, John. 1982. ‘Inca policies and institutions relating to culturaluniﬁcation of the Empire.’ In G. A. Collier, R. I. Rosaldo and J. D. Wirth(eds), The Inca and Aztec States, 1400–1800. New York: Academic, pp. 93–117. 
Rowley-Conwy, Peter. 2001. ‘Time, change, and the archaeology of hunter-gatherers: how original is the “Original Afﬂuent Society”?’ In P. R.Rowley-Conwy, R. Layton and C. Panter-Brick (eds), Hunter-Gatherers: An Interdisciplinary Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress, pp. 39–72.
Sablin, Mikhail, Natasha Reynolds et al. (in preparation). ‘TheEpigravettian site of Yudinovo, Russia: mammoth bone structures asritualized middens.’ 
Sagard, Gabriel. 1939 [1632]. Le Grand Voyage du Pays des Hurons. Paris: Denys Moreau.
Sahlins, Marshall. 1968. ‘Notes on the Original Afﬂuent Society.’ In Leeand DeVore (eds), pp. 85–9. 
—. 1985. Islands of History. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
—. 1996. ‘The sadness of sweetness: the native anthropology of westerncosmology.’ Current Anthropology 37 (3): 395–428.
—. 1999. ‘Two or three things I know about culture.’ Journal of the RoyalAnthropological Institute 5 (3): 399–421.
—. 2004. Apologies to Thucydides. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—. 2008. ‘The stranger-king, or, elementary forms of political life.’Indonesia and the Malay World 36 (105): 177–99.
—. 2017 [1972]. Stone Age Economics. Abingdon and New York: Routledge.
—. 2017. ‘The stranger-kingship of the Mexica.’ In Graeber and Sahlins,pp. 223–48.
Sahlins, Marshall D. and Elman R. Service. 1960. Evolution and Culture. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Saller, Richard P. 1984. ‘Familia, domus, and the Roman conception of thefamily.’ Phoenix 38 (4): 336–55.
Salomon, Frank. 2004. The Cord Keepers. Khipus and Cultural Life in a Peruvian Village. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press.
Sanday, Peggy R. 1981. Female Power and Male Dominance: On the Origins of Sexual Inequality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—. 2002. Women at the Center: Life in a Modern Matriarchy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Santana, Jonathan et al. 2012. ‘Crania with mutilated facial skeletons: anew ritual treatment in an early Pre-Pottery Neolithic B cranial cache atTell Qarassa North (South Syria).’ American Journal of PhysicalAnthropology 149: 205–16. 
Santos-Granero, Fernando. 2009. Vital Enemies: Slavery, Predation, and theAmerindian Political Economy of Life. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Sassaman, Kenneth E. 2005. ‘Poverty Point as structure, event, process.’Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 12 (4): 335–64.
—. (ed.). 2008. ‘The New Archaic.’ The Society for American Archaeology: Archaeological Record 8 (5), Special Issue.
—. 2010. The Eastern Archaic, Historicized. Lanham, MD: AltaMira Press.
Sassaman, Kenneth E. and Michael J. Heckenberger. 2004. ‘Roots of thetheocratic Formative in the Archaic Southeast.’ In G. Crothers (ed.),Hunter-Gatherers in Theory and Archaeology. Carbondale: Center for Archaeological Investigations, Southern Illinois University Press, pp.
423–44. 
Sayre, Gordon M. 1997. Les Sauvages Américains: Representations ofNative Americans in French and English Colonial Literature. ChapelHill: University of North Carolina Press.
Scarry, Elaine. 1985. The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of theWorld. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scerri, Eleanor M. L. 2017. ‘The North African Middle Stone Age and itsplace in recent human evolution.’ Evolutionary Anthropology 26 (3):119–35. 
Scerri, Eleanor M. L., Mark G. Thomas et al. 2018. ‘Did our species evolvein subdivided populations across Africa, and why does it matter?’ Trends in Ecology & Evolution 33 (8): 582–94.
Schefﬂer, Thomas. 2003. ‘“Fertile Crescent”, “Orient”, “Middle East”: thechanging mental maps of Southwest Asia.’ European Review of History 10 (2): 253–72.
Scheidel, Walter. 2017. The Great Leveller: Violence and the History ofInequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century. Princeton, NJ:Princeton University Press.
Schirmer, Wulf. 1990. ‘Some aspects of building at the “aceramic.neolithic” settlement of Çayönü Tepesi.’ World Archaeology 21 (3): 363–87. 
Schlanger, Nathan. 2006. Marcel Mauss: Techniques, Technology, and Civilisation. New York and Oxford: Durkheim Press/Berghahn Books.
Schmandt-Besserat, Denise. 1992. Before Writing. Austin: University ofTexas Press. 
Schmidt, Isabell and Andreas Zimmermann. 2019. ‘Population dynamicsand socio-spatial organization of the Aurignacian: scalable quantitativedemographic data for western and central Europe.’ PLoS ONE 14 (2):e0211562. 
Schmidt, Klaus. 1998. ‘Frühneolithische Silexdolche.’ In Güven Arsebük etal. (eds), Light on Top of the Black Hill. Studies Presented to Halet Çambel. Istanbul: Yeni, pp. 681–92. 
—. 2006. Sie bauten die ersten Tempel. Das rätselhafte Heiligtum derSteinzeitjäger. Munich: C. H. Beck. 
Schmidt, Morgan J. et al. 2014. ‘Dark earths and the human built landscapein Amazonia: a widespread pattern of anthrosol formation.’ Journal of 
Archaeological Science 42: 152–65. 
Schnapp, Alain. 1996. The Discovery of the Past: The Origins ofArchaeology. London: British Museum Press. 
Schneider, Thomas. 2008. ‘Periodizing Egyptian history: Manetho,convention, and beyond.’ In Klaus-Peter Adam (ed.), Historiographie inder Antike. Berlin and New York: De Gruyter, pp. 183–97.
Schoep, Ilse. 2008. ‘Building the labyrinth: Arthur Evans and theconstruction of Minoan civlisation.’ American Journal of Archaeology 122 (1): 5–32.
Schor, Juliet B. 1991. The Overworked American: The Unexpected Declineof Leisure. New York: Basic Books. 
Schrakamp, I. 2010. Krieger und Waffen im frühen Mesopotamien.Organisation und Bewaffnung des Militärs in frühdynastischer undsargonischer Zeit. Marburg: Philipps-Universität.
Schulting, Rick J. 2006. ‘Antlers, bone pins and ﬂint blades: the Mesolithiccemeteries of Téviec and Hoëdic, Brittany.’ Antiquity 70 (268): 335–50.
Schulting, Rick J. and Michael P. Richards. 2001. ‘Dating women andbecoming farmers: new palaeodietary and AMS dating evidence from theBreton Mesolithic cemeteries of Téviec and Hoëdic.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 20: 314–44. 
Schulting, Rick J. and Linda Fibiger (eds). 2012. Sticks, Stones, and BrokenBones: Neolithic Violence in a European Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schultz, James W. 1935. My Life as an Indian. Boston: Houghton MifﬂinCompany.
Scott, James C. 1990. Domination and the Arts of Resistance. New Haven,CT and London: Yale University Press.
—. 2009. The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of UplandSoutheast Asia. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press. 
—. 2017. Against the Grain: A Deep History of the Earliest States. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
Seeman, Mark F. 1979. ‘Feasting with the dead: Ohio Hopewell charnelhouse ritual as a context for redistribution.’ In David S. Brose and N’omi 
B. Greber (eds), Hopewell Archaeology: The Chillicothe Conference. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, pp. 39–46.
—. 1988. ‘Ohio Hopewell trophy-skull artifacts as evidence for competitionin Middle Woodland societies circa 50 B.C.–A.D. 350.’ American 
Antiquity 53 (3): 565–77.
—. 2004. ‘Hopewell art in Hopewell places.’ In Richard F. Townsend andRobert V. Sharp (eds), Hero, Hawk, and Open Hand: American IndianArt of the Ancient Midwest and South. New Haven, CT and London: Yale University Press, pp. 57–71.
Seidlmayer, Stephan J. 2000. ‘The First Intermediate Period (c.2160–2055 BC).’ in I. Shaw (ed.), pp. 118–47.
Seligman, Adam B., Robert P. Weller, Michael J. Puett and Bennett Simon.2008. Ritual and its Consequences: An Essay on the Limits of Sincerity.Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sen, Amartya. 2001. Development as Freedom. Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress. 
Servet, Jean-Michel. 1981. ‘Primitive order and archaic trade. Part I.’Economy and Society 10 (4): 423–50.
—. 1982. ‘Primitive order and archaic trade. Part II.’ Economy and Society11 (1): 22–59.
Severi, Carlo (transl. Janet Lloyd, Foreword by David Graeber). 2015. The Chimera Principle: An Anthropology of Memory and Imagination.Chicago: HAU Books.
Shady Solis, Ruth, Jonathan Haas and Winifred Creamer. 2001. ‘DatingCaral, a Preceramic site in the Supe Valley on the central coast of Peru.’Science 292 (5517): 723–6.
Sharan, M. K. 1983. ‘Origin of republics in India with special reference tothe Yaudheya tribe.’ In B. N. Mukherjee et al. (eds), Sri Dinesacandrika 
– Studies in Indology. Delhi: Sundeep Prakashan, pp. 241–52.Sharer, Robert J. 2003. ‘Founding events and Teotihuacan connections atCopán, Honduras.’ In Braswell (ed.), pp. 143–65.Sharma, J. P. 1968. Republics in Ancient India, 1500 B.C. to 500 B.C.Leiden: Brill. Shaughnessy, Edward. L. 1989. ‘Historical geography and the extent of theearliest Chinese kingdom.’ Asia Minor (2) 2: 1–22.—. 1999. ‘Western Zhou history.’ In Loewe and Shaughnessy (eds), pp.288–351. Shaw, Ian (ed.). 2000. The Oxford History of Ancient Egypt. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shennan, Stephen. 2009. ‘Evolutionary demography and the populationhistory of the European Early Neolithic.’ Human Biology 81: 339–55. 
—. 2018. The First Farmers of Europe: An Evolutionary Perspective.Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shennan, Stephen and Kevan Edinborough. 2006. ‘Prehistoric populationhistory: from the Late Glacial to the Late Neolithic in Central andNorthern Europe.’ Journal of Archaeological Science 34: 1339–45. 
Shennan, Stephen et al. 2013. ‘Regional population collapse followed initialagriculture booms in mid-Holocene Europe.’ Nature 4: 1–8. 
Sheppard, Peter J. 2011. ‘Lapita colonization across the Near/RemoteOceania boundary.’ Current Anthropology 52 (6): 799–840.
Sherratt, Andrew. 1980. ‘Water, soil and seasonality in early cerealcultivation.’ World Archaeology 11: 313–30. 
—. 1995. ‘Reviving the grand narrative: archaeology and long-termchange.’ Journal of European Archaeology 3 (1): 1–32.
—. 1997. Economy and Society in Prehistoric Europe. ChangingPerspectives. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
—. 1999. ‘Cash crops before cash: organic consumables and trade.’ In ChrisGosden and John G. Hather (eds), The Prehistory of Food: Appetites for Change. London: Routledge, pp. 13–34.
—. 2004. ‘Fractal farmers: patterns of Neolithic origins and dispersal.’ In C.Scarre et al. (eds), Explaining Social Change: Studies in Honour of ColinRenfrew. Cambridge: McDonald Institute, pp. 53–63.
—. 2007. ‘Diverse origins: regional contributions to the genesis offarming.’ In Colledge and Conolly (eds), pp. 1–20.
Sherratt, Susan. 2000. Arthur Evans, Knossos, and the Priest-King. Oxford: Ashmolean Museum. 
—. 2001. ‘Potemkin palaces and route-based economies.’ In Voutsaki andKillen (eds), pp. 214–38.
Sherwood, Sarah C. and Tristam R. Kidder. 2011. ‘The DaVincis of dirt:geoarchaeological perspectives on Native American mound building inthe Mississippi River basin.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 30: 69–87. 
Shimony, Annemarie. 1961. Conservatism Among the Six Nations Iroquois Reservation. Yale University Publications in Anthropology 65. NewHaven, CT and London: Yale University Press.
—. 1970. ‘Iroquois witchcraft at Six Nations.’ In Deward E. Walker, Jr(ed.), Systems of Witchcraft and Sorcery. Moscow, ID: AnthropologicalMonographs of the University of Idaho, pp. 239–65. 
Shipton, Ceri et al. 2018. ‘78,000-year-old record of Middle and LaterStone Age innovation in an East African tropical forest.’ Nature Communications 9: 1832. 
Shklar, Judith. 1964. ‘Rousseau’s images of authority.’ The American Political Science Review 58 (4): 919–32.
Shumilovskikh, Lyudmila S., Elena Novenko and Thomas Giesecke. 2017.‘Long-term dynamics of the East European forest-steppe ecotone.’Journal of Vegetation Science 29 (3): 416–26.
Sikora, Martin et al. 2017. ‘Ancient genomes show social and reproductivebehavior of early Upper Paleolithic foragers.’ Science 358 (6363): 659–62. 
Silver, Morris. 2015. ‘Reinstating classical Athens: the production of publicorder in an ancient community.’ Journal on European History of Law 1: 3–17. 
Silverblatt, Irene. 1987. Moon, Sun and Witches: Gender Ideologies andClass in Inca and Colonial Peru. Princeton, NJ: Princeton UniversityPress. 
Silverman, Eric K. 2001. Masculinity, Motherhood, and Mockery:Psychoanalyzing Culture and the Iatmul Naven Rite in New Guinea. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Simonse, Simon. 1992. Kings of Disaster: Dualism, Centralism, and theScapegoat-king in Southeastern Sudan. Leiden: Brill. 
—. 2005. ‘Tragedy, ritual and power in Nilotic regicide: the regicidaldramas of the Eastern Nilotes of Sudan in contemporary perspective.’ In
D. Quigley (ed.), The Character of Kingship. Oxford: Berg, pp. 67–100.Sioui, Georges. 1972. ‘A la réﬂexion des Blancs d’Amérique du Nord etautres étrangers.’ Recherches amérindiennes au Quebec 2 (4–5): 65–8.—. 1992. For an Amerindian Autohistory: An Essay on the Foundations ofa Social Ethic. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. —. 1999. Huron-Wendat. The Heritage of the Circle. Vancouver: British Columbia University Press.
Sipilä, Joonäs and Antti Lahelma. 2006. ‘War as a paradigmaticphenomenon: endemic violence and the Finnish Subneolithic.’ In T.Pollard and I. Banks (eds), Studies in the Archaeology of Conﬂict. Leiden: Brill, pp. 189–209.
Skoglund, Pontus et al. 2016. ‘Genomic insights into the peopling of theSouthwest Paciﬁc.’ Nature 538 (7626): 510–13. 
Skousen, B. Jacob. 2016. ‘Pilgrimage and the Construction of Cahokia: AView from the Emerald Site’. Doctoral dissertation, University of Illinoisat Urbana-Champaign.
Slon, Viviane et al. 2014. ‘The plastered skulls from the Pre-PotteryNeolithic B Site of Yiftahel (Israel) – a computed tomography-casedanalysis.’ PLoS ONE 9 (2): e89242.
Smith, Bruce D. 1992. ‘Mississippian elites and solar alignments: areﬂection of managerial necessity, or levers of social inequality?’ In A.
W. Barker and T. R. Pauketat (eds), Lords of the Southeast: Social Inequality and the Native Elites of Southeastern North America. Washington: Archaeological Papers of the American AnthropologicalAssociation, pp 11–30.
—. 2001. ‘Low-level food production.’ Journal of Archaeological Research 9 (1): 1–43.
Smith, De Cost. 1888. ‘Witchcraft and demonism of the modern Iroquois.’The Journal of American Folklore 1 (3): 184–94.
Smith, Michael E. 1984. ‘The Aztlan migrations of the Nahuatl chronicles:myth or history?’ Ethnohistory 31 (3): 153–86.
—. 2012. The Aztecs (3rd edn). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
—. 2015. ‘Neighborhood formation in semi-urban settlements.’ Journal of Urbanism 8 (2): 173–98.
—. 2019. ‘Energized crowding and the generative role of settlementaggregation and urbanization.’ In Attila Gyucha (ed.), Coming Together:Comparative Approaches to Population Aggregation and EarlyUrbanization. New York: SUNY Press, pp. 37–58.
Smith, Michael. E. et al. 2017. ‘The Teotihuacan anomaly: the historicaltrajectory of urban design in ancient Central Mexico.’ Open Archaeology 3: 175–93. 
—. 2019. ‘Apartment compounds, households, and population in theancient city of Teotihuacan, Mexico.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 1–20. doi:10.1017/S0956536118000573.
Snow, Dean. 1991. ‘Dating the emergence of the League of the Iroquois: areconsideration of the documentary evidence.’ In Nancy-Anne McClureZeller (ed.), A Beautiful and Fruitful Place: Selected RensselaerswijckSeminar Papers. Albany, NY: New Netherland Publishing, pp. 139–43.
Soffer, Olga. 1985. The Upper Palaeolithic of the Central Russian Plain. London: Academic Press. 
Soffer, Olga, James M. Adovasio and David C. Hyland. 2000. ‘Textiles,basketry, gender and status in the Upper Paleolithic.’ Current Anthropology 41 (4): 511–37.
Soustelle, Jacques. 1962. The Daily Life of the Aztecs on the Eve of theSpanish Conquest. New York: Macmillan. 
Sperber, Dan. 2005. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Spier, Leslie. 1930. Klamath Ethnography. Berkeley: University ofCalifornia Press. 
Spott, Robert and Alfred L. Kroeber. 1942. ‘Yurok narratives.’ University ofCalifornia Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology 35 (9):143–256. 
Spretnak, Charlene. 2011. ‘Anatomy of a backlash: concerning the work ofMarija Gimbutas.’ Journal of Archaeomythology 7: 25–51. 
Spriggs, Matthew. 1995. ‘The Lapita culture and Austronesian prehistory inOceania.’ In Peter Bellwood et al. (eds), The Austronesians: Historical and Comparative Perspectives. Canberra: ANU Press, pp. 112–33. 
—. 1997. The Island Melanesians. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Starna, William A. 2008. ‘Retrospecting the origins of the League of theIroquois.’ Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 152 (3):279–321. 
Steckley, John. 1981 ‘Kandiaronk: a man called Rat.’ In J. Steckley, Untold Tales: Four Seventeenth-Century Hurons. Toronto: Associated Heritage Publishing, pp. 41–52.
—. 2014. The Eighteenth-Century Wyandot: A Clan-Based Study. Waterloo, Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press.
Steinke, Kyle and Dora C. Y. Ching (eds). 2014. Art and Archaeology of the Erligang Civilization. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Steinkeller, Piotr. 2015. ‘The employment of labour on national buildingprojects in the Ur III period.’ In Steinkeller and Hudson (eds), pp. 137–236. 
Steinkeller, Piotr and Michael Hudson (eds). 2015. Labor in the Ancient World. Dresden: ISLET-Verlag.
Stern, Jessica Yirush. 2017. The Lives in Objects: Native Americans, BritishColonists, and Cultures of Labor and Exchange in the Southeast. ChapelHill: University of North Carolina Press. 
Stevens, Chris and Dorian Q. Fuller. 2012. ‘Did Neolithic farming fail? Thecase for a Bronze Age agricultural revolution in the British Isles.’Antiquity 86 (333): 707–22.
Stone, Elizabeth C. and Paul Zimansky. 1995. ‘The tapestry of power in aMesopotamian city.’ Scientiﬁc American 272 (4): 118–23.
Stordeur, Danielle. 2000. ‘Jerf el Ahmar et l’émergence du Néolithique auProche-Orient.’ In Jean Guilaine (ed.), Premiers paysans du monde:Naissances des agricultures, Séminaire du Collège de France. Paris: Errance, pp. 33–60.
Straus, Lawrence G. 1977. ‘The Upper Palaeolithic cave site of Altamira(Santander, Spain).’ Quaternaria 19: 135–48. 
Straus, Lawrence. G. et al. (eds). 1990. Humans at the End of the Ice Age:The Archaeology of the Pleistocene-Holocene Transition. New York and London: Plenum Press. 
Strehlow, T. G. H. 1947. Aranda Traditions. Carlton: Melbourne UniversityPress. 
Strudwick, Nigel. 1985. The Administration of Egypt in the Old Kingdom:The Highest Titles and their Holders. London: KPI. 
Stuart, David. 2000. ‘The arrival of strangers: Teotihuacan and Tollan inClassic Maya history.’ In D. Carrasco, L. Jones and S. Sessions (eds),Mesoamerica’s Classic Heritage: From Teotihuacan to Aztecs. Boulder: University Press of Colorado, pp. 465–513.
Styring, A. et al. 2017. ‘Isotope evidence for agricultural extensiﬁcationreveals how the world’s ﬁrst cities were fed.’ Nature Plants 3: 17076. 
Subramanian T. S. 2010. ‘The rise and fall of a Harappan city.’ Frontline 27 (12).
Sugiyama, Nawa et al. 2019. ‘Artistas mayas en Teotihuacan?’ Arqueología Mexicana 24 (142): 8.
Sugiyama, Nawa, Saburo Sugiyama and Alejandro G. Sarabia. 2013.‘Inside the Sun Pyramid at Teotihuacan, Mexico: 2008–2011 excavationsand preliminary results.’ Latin American Antiquity 24 (4): 403–32.
Sugiyama, Saburo. 2005. Human Sacriﬁce, Militarism, and Rulership:Materialization of State Ideology at the Feathered Serpent Pyramid,Teotihuacan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sugiyama, Saburo and Rubén Cabrera Castro. 2007. ‘The Moon Pyramidproject and the Teotihuacan state polity.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 18: 109– 25. 
Suttles, Wayne. 1968. ‘Coping with abundance.’ In Lee and DeVore (eds),pp. 56–68.
Swanton, John Reed. 1931. ‘Source material for the social and ceremoniallife of the Choctaw Indians.’ Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin103: 1–282. 
Takahashi, Ryuzaburo and Leo Aoi Hosoya. 2003. ‘Nut exploitation inJomon society.’ In S. L. R. Mason and J. G. Hather (eds), Hunter-Gatherer Archaeobotany: Perspectives from the Northern TemperateZone. London: Institute of Archaeology, pp. 146–55.
Tambiah, Stanley J. 1973. ‘The galactic polity in Southeast Asia.’ In S. J.Tambiah, Culture, Thought, and Social Action. Cambridge, MA: HarvardUniversity Press, pp. 3–31.
Tate, Carolyn E. 2012. Reconsidering Olmec Visual Culture: The Unborn,Women, and Creation. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Taube, Karl. A. 1986. ‘The Teotihuacan cave of origin: the iconography andarchitecture of emergence mythology in Mesoamerica and the AmericanSouthwest.’ RES: Anthropology and Aesthetics 12: 51–82. 
—. 1992. ‘The temple of Quetzalcoatl and the cult of sacred war atTeotihuacan.’ Anthropology and Aesthetics 21: 53–87. 
—. 2000. ‘The writing system of ancient Teotihuacan.’ Ancient America,vol. 1. Bardarsville, NC: Center for Ancient American Studies.
Teeter, Emily (ed.). 2011. Before the Pyramids: The Origins of Egyptian Civilization. Chicago: Oriental Institute.
Teschler-Nicola, M. et al. 1996. ‘Anthropologische Spurensicherung – Dietraumatischen und postmortalen Veränderungen an denlinearbandkeramischen Skelettresten von Asparn/Schletz.’ In H. Windl(ed.), Rätsel um Gewalt und Tod vor 7.000 Jahren. Eine Spurensicherung. Asparn: Katalog des NiederösterreichischenLandesmuseum, pp. 47–64.
Testart, Alain. 1982. ‘The signiﬁcance of food storage among hunter-gatherers.’ Current Anthropology 23 (5): 523–37.
—. 2008. ‘Des crânes et des vautours ou la guerre oubliée.’ Paléorient 34 (1): 33–58.
Thapar, Romila. 1984. From Lineage to State: Social Formations in theMid-First Millennium BC in the Ganga Valley. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Thomas, Chad R., Christopher Carr and Cynthia Keller. 2005. ‘Animal.totemic clans of Ohio Hopewellian peoples.’ In Carr and Case (eds), pp.339–85. 
Thomas, Keith. 1978. Religion and the Decline of Magic. Studies inPopular Beliefs in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century England.Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Thompson, Andrew et al. 2015. ‘New dental and isotope evidence ofbiological distance and place of origin for mass burial groups atCahokia’s Mound 72.’ American Journal of Physical Anthropology 158: 341–57. 
Thwaites, Reuben Gold (ed.). 1896–1901. The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents: Travels and Explorations of the Jesuit Missionaries in NewFrance, 1610–1791. 73 vols. Cleveland, OH: Burrows Brothers.
Tilley, Lorna. 2015. ‘Accommodating difference in the prehistoric past:revisiting the case of Romito 2 from a bioarchaeology of careperspective.’ International Journal of Paleopathology 8: 64–74. 
Tisserand, Roger. 1936. Les Concurrents de J.-J. Rousseau à l’Académie de Dijon pour le prix de 1754. Paris: Boivin. 
Tooker, Elisabeth. 1964. An Ethnography of the Huron Indians, 1615–1649. Washington: Bureau of Ethnology, Bulletin number 190.
—. 1971. ‘Clans and moieties in North America.’ Current Anthropology 12 (3): 357–76.
—. 1978. ‘The League of the Iroquois: its history, politics, and ritual.’ InBruce G. Trigger (ed.), Handbook of North American Indians, vol. 15:Northeast. Washington: Smithsonian Press, pp. 418–41.
—. 1984. ‘Women in Iroquois society.’ In M. K. Foster, J. Campisi and M.Mithun (eds), Extending the Rafters: Interdisciplinary Approaches toIroquoian Studies. Albany: State University of New York Press, pp. 109– 23. 
—. 1988. ‘The United States Constitution and the Iroquois League.’Ethnohistory 35: 305– 36. 
—. 1990. ‘Rejoinder to Johansen.’ Ethnohistory 37: 291–7. 
Torres, Constantino Manuel. 2008. ‘Chavín’s psychoactive pharmacopoeia:the iconographic evidence.’ In Conklin and Quilter (eds), pp. 237–57.
Townsend, Camilla. 2006. ‘What in the world have you done to me, mylover? Sex, servitude, and politics among the pre-Conquest Nahuas asseen in the Cantares Mexicanos.’ The Americas 62 (3): 349–89. 
Trautmann, Thomas R. 1992. ‘The revolution in ethnological time.’ Man 27 (2): 379–97.
Treherne, Paul. 1995. ‘The warrior’s beauty: the masculine body and self-identity in Bronze Age Europe.’ Journal of European Archaeology 3 (1):105–44. 
Trigger, Bruce G. 1976. The Children of Aataentsic: A History of the Huron People to 1660. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 
—. 1985. Natives and Newcomers: Canada’s ‘Heroic Age’ Reconsidered. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
—. 1990. ‘Maintaining economic equality in opposition to complexity: anIroquoian case study.’ In S. Upham (ed.), The Evolution of Political Systems: Sociopolitics in Small-Scale Sedentary Societies. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press, pp. 119–45.
—. 2006. A History of Archaeological Thought (2nd edn). Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Trinkaus, Erik. 2018. ‘An abundance of developmental anomalies andabnormalities in Pleistocene people.’ PNAS 115 (47): 11941–6.
Trinkaus, Erik and Alexandra P. Buzhilova. 2018. ‘Diversity anddifferential disposal of the dead at Sunghir.’ Antiquity 92 (361): 7–21.
Trouillot, Michel-Rolph. 2003. ‘Anthropology and the savage slot: thepoetics and politics of otherness.’ In M. R. Trouillot, Global Transformations: Anthropology and the Modern World. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 7–28.
Tuck, James A. 1978. ‘Northern Iroquoian prehistory.’ In Bruce G. Trigger(ed.), Handbook of North American Indians, vol. 15: Northeast. Washington: Smithsonian Press, pp. 322–33.
Tuerenhout, Dirk Van. 2002. ‘Maya warfare: sources and interpretations.’Civilisations 50: 129–52. 
Tully, James. 1994. ‘Aboriginal property and Western theory: recovering amiddle ground.’ Social Philosophy and Policy 11 (2): 153–80.
Turnbull, Colin M. 1982. ‘The ritualization of potential conﬂict between thesexes in Mbuti.’ In Eleanor B. Leacock and Richard B. Lee (eds),Politics and History in Band Societies. Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press, pp. 133–55.
Turner, Nancy J. and Dawn C. Loewen. 1998. ‘The original “free trade”:exchange of botanical products and associated plant knowledge inNorthwestern North America.’ Anthropologica 40 (1): 49–70. 
Turner, Victor. 1969. The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure. Chicago: Aldine.
Tushingham, Shannon and Robert L. Bettinger. 2013. ‘Why foragers chooseacorns before salmon: storage, mobility, and risk in AboriginalCalifornia.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 32 (4): 527–37.
Tylor, Edward. B. 1879. ‘Remarks on the geographical distribution ofgames.’ Journal of the Anthropological Institute 9 (1): 26.
Underhill, Anne P. et al. 2008. ‘Changes in regional settlement patterns andthe development of complex societies in southeastern Shandong, China.’Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 27 (1): 1–29.
Ur, Jason. 2014. ‘Households and the emergence of cities in AncientMesopotamia.’ Cambridge Archaeological Journal 24: 249–68. 
Uriarte, María Teresa. 2016. ‘The Teotihuacan ballgame and the beginningof time.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 17 (1): 17–38.
Urton, Gary and Carrie J. Brezine. 2005. ‘Khipu accounting in ancientPeru.’ Science 309 (5737): 1065–7.
Ussher, James. 1650. The Annals of the Old and New Testament with the Synchronisms of Heathen Story to the Destruction of Hierusalem by theRomanes. London: J. Crook and G. Bedell. 
Valentine, B. et al. 2015. ‘Evidence for patterns of selective urban migrationin the Greater Indus Valley (2600–1900 BC): a lead and strontium isotopemortuary analysis.’ PLoS ONE 10 (4): e0123103.
van der Velde, Pieter. 1990. ‘Banderamik social inequality: A case study.’Germania 68: 19–38. 
Vanhaeren, Marian and Francesco D’Errico. 2005. ‘Grave goods from theSaint-Germain-de-la-Rivière burial: evidence for social inequality in theUpper Palaeolithic.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 24: 117–34. 
Vayda, Andrew P. 1967. ‘Pomo trade feasts.’ In G. Dalton (ed.), Tribal and Peasant Economies. Garden City, NY: Natural History Press, pp. 495– 500. 
Veil, Stephan., K. et al. 2012. ‘A 14,000-year-old amber elk and the originsof northern European art.’ Antiquity 86: 660–63. 
Vennum, Jr, Thomas. 1988. Wild Rice and the Ojibway People. St Paul: Minnesota History Society Press.
Vidale, Massimo. 2000. The Archaeology of Indus Crafts: Indus Crafts.people and Why We Study Them. Rome: IsIAO. 
—. 2010. ‘Aspects of palace life at Mohenjo-Daro.’ South Asian Studies 26 (1): 59–76.
—. 2013. ‘T-Shaped pillars and Mesolithic “chiefdoms” in the prehistory ofSouthern Eurasia: a preliminary note.’ In Dennys Frenez and MaurizioTosi (eds), South Asian Archaeology 2007. Proceedings of the 19thInternational Conference of the European Association of South AsianArchaeology. Oxford: BAR, pp. 51–8.
Videiko, Mikhail. 1996. ‘Die Grossiedlungen der Tripol’e-Kultur in derUkraine.’ Eurasia Antiqua 1: 45–80. 
Viner, Sarah et al. 2010. ‘Cattle mobility in prehistoric Britain: strontiumisotope analysis of cattle teeth from Durrington Walls (Wiltshire,Britain).’ Journal of Archaeological Science 37: 2812–20. 
Von Dassow, Eva. 2011. ‘Freedom in ancient Near Eastern societies.’ InKaren Radner and Eleanor Robson (eds), The Oxford Handbook of Cuneiform Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 205–28.Voutsaki, Soﬁa. 1997. ‘The creation of value and prestige in the AegeanLate Bronze Age.’ Journal of European Archaeology 5 (2): 34–52.
Voutsaki, Soﬁa and John Killen (eds). 2001. Economy and Politics in theMycenaean Palatial States. Cambridge: Cambridge Philological Society. 
Walens, Stanley. 1981. Feasting with Cannibals: An Essay on KwakiutlCosmology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Wallace, Anthony F. C. 1956. ‘Revitalization movements.’ American Anthropologist 58 (2): 264–81.
—. 1958. ‘Dreams and the wishes of the soul: a type of psychoanalytictheory among the seventeenth century Iroquois.’ American Anthropologist (N.S.) 60 (2): 234–48.
Warren, Carol. 1993. Adat and Dinas: Balinese Communities in the Indonesian State. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press.
Weber, Max (transl. Talcott Parsons). 1930 [1905]. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Unwin. 
Weismantel, Mary. 2013. ‘Inhuman eyes: looking at Chavín de Huantar.’ InChristopher Watts (ed.), Relational Archaeologies: Humans, Animals, Things. London: Routledge, pp. 21–41.
Wengrow, David. 1998. ‘The changing face of clay: continuity and changein the transition from village to urban life in the Near East.’ Antiquity 72: 783–95. 
—. 2001. ‘The evolution of simplicity: aesthetic labour and social change inthe Neolithic Near East.’ World Archaeology 33 (2): 168–88.
—. 2003. ‘Interpreting animal art in the prehistoric Near East.’ In T. Potts,
M. Roaf and D. Stein (eds), Culture through Objects. Ancient NearEastern Studies in Honour of P. R. S. Moorey. Oxford: Grifﬁth Institute,pp.139–60.
—. 2006. The Archaeology of Early Egypt: Social Transformations inNorth-East Africa, 10,000 to 2650 BC. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress. 
—. 2008. ‘Prehistories of commodity branding.’ Current Anthropology 49 (1): 7–34.—. 2010a. What Makes Civilization? The Ancient Near East and the Future of the West. Oxford: Oxford University Press.—. 2010b. ‘The voyages of Europa: ritual and trade in the EasternMediterranean, c.2300–1850 BC.’ In William A. Parkinson and Michael 
L. Galaty (eds), Archaic State Interaction: The Eastern Mediterranean in the Bronze Age. Santa Fe: School for Advanced Research Press, pp. 141–60. 
—. 2011. ‘Archival and sacriﬁcial economies in Bronze Age Eurasia: aninteractionist approach to the hoarding of metals.’ In T. Wilkinson, D. J.Bennet and S. Sherratt (eds), Interweaving Worlds. Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp. 135–44.
—. 2015. ‘Cities before the State in early Eurasia’ (the Jack GoodyLecture). Halle: Max Planck Institute for Social Anthropology.
Wengrow, David et al. 2014. ‘Cultural convergence in the Neolithic of theNile Valley: a prehistoric perspective on Egypt’s place in Africa.’Antiquity 88: 95–111. 
Wengrow, David and David Graeber. 2015. ‘Farewell to the childhood ofman: ritual, seasonality, and the origins of inequality’ (the 2014 HenryMyers Lecture). Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 21 (3):597–619. 
—. 2018. ‘Many seasons ago: slavery and its rejection among foragers onthe Paciﬁc Coast of North America.’ American Anthropologist 120 (2):237–49. 
Wernke, Stephen. 2006. ‘The politics of community and Inka statecraft inthe Colca Valley, Peru.’ Latin American Antiquity 17 (2): 177–208. 
White, Christine, T. Douglas Price and Fred J. Longstaffe. 2007.‘Residential histories of the human sacriﬁces at the Moon Pyramid,Teotihuacan: evidence from oxygen and strontium isotopes.’ Ancient Mesoamerica 18 (1): 159–72.
White, Christine D. et al. 2002. ‘Geographic identities of the sacriﬁcialvictims from the Feathered Serpent Pyramid, Teotihuacan: implicationsfor the nature of state power.’ Latin American Antiquity 13 (2): 217–36.
—. 2008. ‘The Teotihuacan dream: an isotopic study of economicorganization and immigration.’ Ontario Archaeology 85–8: 279–97. 
White, Randall. 1985. Upper Palaeolithic Land Use in the Périgord: ATopographical Approach to Subsistence and Settlement. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports.
—. 1999. ‘Intégrer la complexité sociale et opérationnelle: la constructionmatérielle de l’identité sociale à Sungir.’ In M. Julien et al. (eds),Préhistoire d’os: recueil d’études sur l’industrie osseuse préhistoriqueoffert à Henriette Camps-Faber. Aix-en-Provence: L’Université de Provence, pp. 319–31.
White, Richard. 1991. The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, andRepublics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Whitelaw, Todd. 2001. ‘Reading between the tablets: assessing Mycenaeanpalatial involvement in ceramic production and consumption.’ InVoutsaki and Killen (eds), pp. 51–79.
—. 2004. ‘Estimating the population of Neopalatial Knossos.’ In GeraldCadogan, Eleni Hatzaki and Antonis Vasilakis (eds), Knossos: Palace,City, State. London: The British School at Athens, pp. 147–58.
Widmer, Randolph J. 1988. The Evolution of the Calusa: A NonagriculturalChiefdom on the Southwest Florida Coast. Tuscaloosa and London: University of Alabama Press.
Wild, Eva. M. et al. 2004. ‘Neolithic massacres: local skirmishes or generalwarfare in Europe?’ Radiocarbon 46: 377–85. 
Wilk, Richard. 2004. ‘Miss Universe, the Olmec and the Valley of Oaxaca.’Journal of Social Archaeology 4 (1): 81–98.
Wilkinson, Toby. 2014. ‘The Early Transcaucasian phenomenon instructural-systemic perspective: cuisine, craft and economy.’ Paléorient 40 (2): 203–29. 
Wilkinson, Tony J. 2010. ‘The Tell: social archaeology and territorialspace.’ In D. Bolger and L. Maguire (eds), The Development of Pre-stateCommunities in the Ancient Near East: Studies in Honour of EdgarPeltenburg. Oxford: Oxbow, pp. 55–62.
Will, Manuel, Nicholas J. Conard and Christian A. Tryon. 2019. ‘Timingand trajectory of cultural evolution on the African continent 200,000–30,000 years ago.’ In Y. Sahle et al. (eds), Modern Human Origins andDispersal. Tübingen: Kerns Verlag, pp. 25–72.
Willcox, George. 2005. ‘The distribution, natural habitats and availability ofwild cereals in relation to their domestication in the Near East: multipleevents, multiple centres.’ Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 14: 534–41. 
—. 2007. ‘The adoption of farming and the beginnings of the Neolithic inthe Euphrates valley: cereal exploitation between the 12th and 8thmillennia cal. BC.’ In Colledge and Conolly (eds), pp. 21–36.
—. 2012. ‘Searching for the origins of arable weeds in the Near East.’Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 21 (2): 163–7.
Willcox, G., Sandra Fornite and Linda Herveux. 2008. ‘Early Holocenecultivation before domestication in northern Syria.’ Vegetation History and Archaeobotany 17: 313–25. 
Williams, Stephen. 1990. ‘The Vacant Quarter and other late events in theLower Valley.’ In D. H. Dye (ed.), Towns and Temples Along the Mississippi. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, pp. 170–80.
Wills, John H. 1970. ‘Speaking arenas of ancient Mesopotamia.’ QuarterlyJournal of Speech 56 (4): 398–405.
Wissler, Clark. H. 1922. The American Indian. New York: Douglas C. McMurtrie. 
—. 1927. ‘The culture-area concept in social anthropology.’ American Journal of Sociology 32 (6): 881–91.
Wolf, Eric. R. 1982. Europe and the People Without History. Berkeley:University of California Press.
—. 1999. Envisioning Power: Ideologies of Dominance and Crisis.Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wood, Andrée. R. 1992. ‘The detection, removal, storage, and speciesidentiﬁcation of prehistoric blood residues from Çayönü.’ American Journal of Archaeology 96 (2): 374.
Woodburn, James. 1982. ‘Egalitarian societies.’ Man (N.S.) 17: 431–51. 
—. 1988. ‘African hunter-gatherer social organization: is it best understoodas a product of encapsulation?’ In T. Ingold, D. Riches and J. Woodburn(eds), Hunters and Gatherers, vol. 1: History Evolution and SocialChange. Oxford: Berg, pp. 43–64.
—. 2005. ‘Egalitarian societies revisited.’ In T. Widlok and W. G. Tadesse(eds), Property and Equality, vol. 1: Ritualisation, Sharing,Egalitarianism. New York: Berghahn Books, pp. 18–31.
Woods, William I. 2004. ‘Population nucleation, intensive agriculture, andenvironmental degradation: the Cahokia example.’ Agriculture and Human Values 21: 255–61. 
Woods, William I. et al. (eds). 2009. Amazonian Dark Earths: Wim Sombroak’s Vision. Dordrecht and London: Springer.
Wright, Emily et al. 2014. ‘Age and season of pig slaughter at LateNeolithic Durrington Walls (Wiltshire, UK) as detected through a newsystem for recording tooth wear.’ Journal of Archaeological Science 52: 497–514. 
Wright, Katherine I. 2007. ‘Women and the emergence of urban society inMesopotamia.’ In S. Hamilton and R. D. Whitehouse (eds), Archaeology and Women: Ancient and Modern Issues. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, pp. 199–245.
Wright, Katherine I. et al. 2008. ‘Stone bead technologies and early craftspecialization: insights from two Neolithic Sites in eastern Jordan.’Levant 40 (2): 131–65.
Wright, Rita P. 2010. The Ancient Indus: Urbanism, Economy, and Society.New York: Cambridge University Press.
Yen, Douglas. E. 1995. ‘The development of Sahul agriculture withAustralia as bystander.’ Antiquity 69 (265): 831–47.
Yerkes, Richard W. 2005. ‘Bone chemistry, body parts, and growth marks:evaluating Ohio Hopewell and Cahokia Mississippian seasonality,subsistence, ritual, and feasting.’ American Antiquity 70 (2): 241–65.
Yoffee, Norman. 1995. ‘The political economy of early Mesopotamianstates.’ Annual Review of Anthropology 24: 281–311. 
—. 2005. Myths of the Archaic State: Evolution of the Earliest Cities,States, and Civilizations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Younger, John. 2016. ‘Minoan women.’ In S. L. Budin and J. M. Turfa(eds), Women in Antiquity: Real Women Across the Ancient World.London and New York: Routledge, pp. 573–94. 
Yuan, Jing and Rowan Flad. 2005. ‘New zooarchaeological evidence forchanges in Shang Dynasty animal sacriﬁce.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 24 (3): 252–70.
Zagarell, Allen. 1986. ‘Trade, women, class, and society in AncientWestern Asia.’ Current Anthropology 27 (5): 415–30.
Zedeño, María Nieves. 2008. ‘Bundled worlds: the roles and interactions ofcomplex objects from the North American Plains.’ Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 15: 362–78. 
Zeder, Melinda A. and Brian Hesse. 2000. ‘The initial domestication ofgoats (Capra hircus) in the Zagros Mountains 10,000 years ago.’ Science 287: 2254–7. 
Zheltova, Maria N. 2015. ‘Kostenki 4: Gravettian of the east – not EasternGravettian.’ Quaternary International 359–60: 362–71. 
Zhilin, Mikhail et al. 2018. ‘Early art in the Urals: new research on thewooden sculpture from Shigir.’ Antiquity 92 (362): 334–50.
Zvelebil, Marek. 2006. ‘Mobility, contact, and exchange in the Baltic Seabasin, 6000–2000 BC.’ Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 25: 178– 92. 

Index 
The page references in this index correspond to the print edition from whichthis ebook was created, and clicking on them will take you to the location inthe ebook where the equivalent print page would begin. To ﬁnd a speciﬁcword or phrase from the index, please use the search feature of your ebookreader. 
‘Abbots of Unreason’, 117–18 

Abrams, Philip, 430–1 

Abu Hureyra (archaeological site), 236 

Abydos, Egypt, 401, 405 

acorns, 195–7, 557n48, 558n52 

Acosta, José de, 33 

Adena period, in North America, 458, 602n16 

administration, urban, 302, 304–8, 368–9, 413, 418–27, 437, 474 
see also bureaucracy
Adodarhoh, 484–5, 607n68 

Adonis, Gardens of, 210–11, 500 

Africa: culture of the human body, 403–6; domestication of crops, 252;early human populations, 80–1, 83, 539n6; initiation rituals, 365;Neolithic farming in, 263–4 
see also 
Egypt; Nilotic peoples; Nuer 
people; Shilluk people
Age of Reason, 37 

‘Agricultural Revolution,’ 153, 213, 230, 234, 248, 548n21 

agriculture: in ancient Egypt, 405–6; and cultural patterns, 244–5, 247–8,249–51; early cultivation in Mesopotamia, 227–36; and land tenure, 250– 
1; partially abandoned in England (c.3300 BC), 105–6; and prehistoricinnovations, 499–500; rejection of, 165–6, 254, 451, 543n41; and stateformation, 443–4; theories about advent of, 4, 10; and urbanization, 287 
see also farming 
Aguada Fénix, 571n20 


ajaw (Mayan ruler), 410 

Akrotiri, Santorini, 435 

Algonkians, 33, 38, 73, 488 

Altamira cave paintings, 1, 542n38 

Amazonia/ Amazonians, 33, 124, 158, 160, 258, 267–71 

American Museum of Natural History, 171, 173–4 

American Revolution, 67–8, 69 

Americas, loss of indigenous population, 258, 568n12 

Ames, Kenneth, 556n32 

Amorite Dynasty, 303–4 

ancestors, care of, 405–7 

Andes, 251, 258, 372–4, 380, 386–7, 409, 413, 461 
see also Inca Empire
Aní-Kutánî (priesthood), 472 

Ankhtiﬁ, Egyptian nomarch, 417–18 

Anthropocene, 258 

anthropology, 496 

Anuak people, 403 

Anyang, China, 400–1, 411 

Aquinas, Thomas, 32 

Aranda people, 161–2 

Arawakan people, 190, 268–9 

archaeobotany, 233–4 

Archaic period, in North America, 145, 458, 459 

Argens, Marquis d,’ 58, 533n8 

Aristotle, 86, 282 

Arslantepe, Turkey, 310–11 

art and imagery: Amazonian, 569n42; in Mississippian culture, 467; cave art, 1, 84; in Chavín de Huántar, 386–90, 591–2n53; at Göbleki Tepe, 89,242–3; Hopewell earthworks, 460–2; in Mayan culture, 333–6; Minoan,435–9, 601n146; Olmec, 383; in Teotihuacan, Mexico, 330–2 
see also female ﬁgurines
‘Aryan’ invasions, 215 

Ascher, Marcia, 573n36 

Ashurbanipal (Assyrian Emperor), 302 

Asparn (Neolithic site), 261 

Assiniboine people, 110 
Assyriology, 301–2 
Atahualpa (Inca ruler), 374, 376 
Athabascan people, 171, 174, 199 
Athens, 76, 290, 302, 305–6, 358, 360 
Atrahasis (ﬂood-myth), 299 
Atsugewi people, 202 
Attiwandaronk people, 483, 487–90 
Augustine, St, 139, 548n23 
Australia, aboriginal societies, 545n54 
Austronesian languages, 265, 569n36 
autonomy, personal, 130–1, 158 
see also freedom 
Axial Age, 450 
ayllu (Andean village associations), 373, 423–5, 427, 588n15 
Aztecs, 33, 328–9, 334, 346, 348–9, 358, 370–2, 385 
Aztlán, 328, 581n1 

Baartman, Sarah, 540n11 
Babylon, 282 
baking and brewing, in ancient Egypt, 407 
Bali: land management, 567n5; seka system, 320–1; ‘theatre states,’ 591n46 
ball games, Mesoamerican, 384–6, 465, 584n38, 590–1n44 
‘barbarians’, 445–6 
Basque settlements, 295–7, 573n36 
Basta, Jordan (Neolithic site), 227 
Ba.ur Höyük, 311 
Batek people, 128 
Bateson, Gregory, 56–7 
Baum, L. Frank, 215 
Beaver Wars, 483, 511 
Beidelman, Thomas, 97 
Beringia land bridge, 145, 155 
Bettinger, Robert L., 558n53, 559n71 
Beuchat, Henri, 107 
Biard, Father Pierre, 38, 148 
‘Big Idol’ (prehistoric monument), 147 
biodiversity, 260 
Bismarck, Otto, 381 
Bloch, Maurice, 546n54, 593n78 

Boas, Franz, 108, 171–3, 174, 182 

Bodin, Jean, 359 

Boehm, Christopher, 86–7, 93, 129, 502 

Bonald, Vicomte de, 495 

Bookchin, Murray, 260, 568n17 

Bourgmont (French explorer), 481 

Braidwood, Robert, 138 

British Ethnological Society, 70 

Brixham Cave, Devon, 79 

Buddhist monasteries (sangha), 319–20 

bureaucracy: and esoteric knowledge, 474–6; modern global, 431; and the state, 366, 418–20, 425–6, 597n115; village, 420–6 
see also administration, urban
burials: prehistoric, 14, 84, 85, 87–8, 91–2, 102–4, 147, 262–3; and ritualviolence, 399–403, 405, 412, 466 

Burke, Edmund, 495 

Burke, Peter, 546n55 

Byblos, Lebanon, 436, 595n94 

Cabeza de Vaca, Álvar Núñez, 24 

Cahokia (Mississippian city), 330, 399, 452, 464–9, 475, 482, 503 

Caillois, Roger, 546n55 

Cakaudrove (Fijian kingdom), 430 

Calakmul, Mexico, 330 

calculus, used in prehistoric monuments, 143–4 

California, aboriginal societies, 165–70, 175–87, 195–7, 199–204, 208,254, 504, 553n2, 555n18, 555n19, 556n26, 559n73 

calpolli, 584–5n48 

Calusa people, 150–4, 156–7, 164, 188, 447, 550–1n41 

Camargo, Diego Muñoz, Historia de Tlaxcala (1585), 350, 585n52 

Canada, Paciﬁc Coast aboriginal societies, 165–6, 175–85, 192–4, 195–204,208, 504, 553n1, 557n45, 557n49 

Canetti, Elias, 276, 281, 519 

cannibalism, 487 

capitalism, 178–9 

‘capturing societies’, 187–91, 371 
Caral, Peru, 287 

care: and domination, 513–14, 520–1; and slavery, 188, 191; and violence,399–408 

Caribs, 33 

carnivals, 116 

caste system, 317–20, 579n94 

Caste War (1847–1901), 376 

Çatalhöyük, 212–14, 220–5, 235, 246, 500, 561n15 

cave art, 1, 84 

Çayönü Tepesi, 243, 271, 565n58, 565n59 

Cayuga Nation, 483 

ceramics, origins of, 500 

cereal cultivation, 229, 236, 240, 264, 272, 444, 448, 451, 460 

Cervantes de Salazar, Francisco, Crónica, 350–4 

Chadwick, Hector Munro, 311, 312 

Chagnon, Napoleon, 15–16, 110, 529n19, 530n21, 530n25, 556n29 

Chapman, John, 572n34 

charismatic politics, 365–9, 391, 417–18, 507, 587n2, 587n7 

charity, 520–1 

Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor, 347, 350, 370 

Charlevoix, Father Pierre de, 50, 393 

Chase, A. W., 192 

Chateaubriand, François-René de, 58 

chattel slavery, 450, 575n50 

Chavín de Huánar, 386–91, 398, 433–4, 507, 591–2n53 

Cherokee Nation, 472, 490, 606n56 

Chetco Nation, 192–3, 200, 557n44 

Cheyenne people, 108–10 

Chiapas, 376 

Chichén Itzá (Mayan city), 335, 378 

Chichimec people, 356, 357 

Chickasaw Nation, 472 

Childe, V. Gordon, 8–9, 25, 171, 212–13, 548n21 

children: political importance of, 416; and wealth, 540n24 

China: adoption of foreign customs, 174; ancient cities, 287; domesticationof animals, 271; domestication of crops, 251; Longshan period, 324, 
581n109; Neolithic cities, 323–6; oracle bones, 412; and sovereignty, 
597n110; ‘state formation’, 411–13; statecraft, 30 

Chinard, Gilbert, 70–1 

Choctaw Nation, 469, 472 

Cholula, Mexico, 347, 350 

Christianity, rejections of, 542n32 

chunkey (Native American sport), 465, 604n32 

Cieza de León, Pedro, Crónica del Perú (1553), 375 

cities: ancient Chinese, 324–7; imaginary, 276–8; independent, 581n104;Mesoamerican, 328–58; Mesopotamian, 297–313, 321–3; rise of, 281–8,515–17; South Asian, 313–22; Ukrainian ‘mega-sites’, 288–97, 321–2 

civilization, 432–4, 443, 516, 529n17 

civitas, 3 

clan systems (Native American), 456–7, 463–4, 466, 477–80 

Clark, John E., 143–4 

Clarke, David, 247 

Clastres, Pierre, 73, 112–14, 135–6, 502, 520, 544–5n48 

climate change, 257–8 

‘Clovis people’, 155 

coffee, 473, 606n57 

coined money, 450 

‘Columbian exchange’, 256 

Columbus, Christopher, 165, 537n56 

communism, 47–8, 66, 131 

‘complex societies’, 361, 515 

consensus decision-making, 320–1, 353–4, 471, 484 

Cook, Captain James, 266, 334, 582n16 

Coosa, kingdom of, 470–1 

Copán, Mexico, 334, 335, 583n17 

Cortés, Hernán, 334, 346–8, 350–1, 353–4, 356, 370, 376, 582n16 

Cortés, Martín, 351 

corvée, 299, 574n46 

creation myths, 78, 82 

credit-rating agencies, 431 

Creek Nation, 472, 473 

Crèvecoeur, J. Hector St John de, 531n29 

crops, domestication of, 229–36, 251–4, 567n9 
Crosby, Alfred W., 256, 349 
Crow people, 108, 110 
Crumley, Carole, 515, 610n15 
Cucuteni-Tripolye culture, 291, 294 
Cuicuilco (Mesoamerican city), 337 
cuisine, forager societies, 123–4 
Culhua-Mexica people, 328, 581n3 
culture areas, 166, 170–5, 185, 203, 207, 432, 504–5, 520, 555n17 
cuneiform mathematics, 600n140 
cuneiform script, 304–5, 306–7, 433 
Cushing, Frank, 550–1n41 
Cuzco, 411 
cylinder seals, 577n71 

‘dark ages’, 416–18, 443 

Darwin, Charles, 446, 539n2 

Dayak people, 447 

De Soto, Hernando, 470 

debate, reasoned, 37–8, 45–6 

DeBoer, Warren, 24 

debt peonage, 559–60n73 

Delâge, Denys, 512 

deltas, and cities, 286–7 

democracy, 17, 319, 530n23, 587n3; Athenian, 76, 305–6, 580n99; andelections, 356, 367, 431, 587n3; Enlightenment view of, 17, 530n23;Mesoamerican, 333, 346–58; Mesopotamian, 301–4; modern, 366–7,431; Native American inﬂuence on the Constitution of the United States,532–3n5; in South Asia, 319–20, 580n99; see also sortition 

Dempsey, Jack, 438–9 

Denisovans, 81 

Denonville, Marquis de, 490–1 

Dholavira, 314 

Diamond, Jared, 10–11, 237, 252–4, 255, 349, 419, 528n6, 597n115 

Díaz del Castillo, Bernal, Historia verdadera (1568), 350, 458n10, 586n56 

Dickens, Charles, 464 

Diderot, Denis, 58 

Dinka people, 403 
disease, spread by European colonialism, 256–7, 349 

divination, 412, 596n106, 596n107 

‘divine kings’, 393–6, 595n96 

Dodds Pennock, Caroline, 588n9, 588n11 

Dolní Vestonice, Moravia, 87–8, 102, 104, 540n22, 543n38 

Domenici, Davide, 584n41 

domination, three elementary forms of, 362–70, 390–1, 413–18, 431, 439,468 

Dordogne, France, cave burial, 88 

Douglas, Mary, 546n54 

dreams, in Iroquoian culture, 23–4, 454–5, 486, 608n74 

Drevetière, Delisle de la, 58 

Dunbar, Robin, 279, 297, 419, 570n2, 597n115 

Durkheim, Émile, 159, 161, 545–6n54 

Eanna complex, Uruk, 291, 305–6, 576n65, 576n66 

‘early states’, 409–13, 429, 508 

Eastern Hadza, 101 

Eastern Woodlands, 30, 171, 252, 271, 459, 502–3, 511 
see also 
HopewellInteraction Sphere; Mississippian civilization; Wendat (Huron) 

eccentricity, in indigenous societies, 96–8 

ecology, and history, 256–7 

‘ecology of freedom’, 260 

education, Sumerian invention of, 307 

Eemian interglacial period, 257 

‘egalitarian societies’, 73–6, 125–32, 396, 447, 522 

egalitarianism, 131–2, 248, 296–7, 321–2, 332, 365–6, 552n50 

Egypt: emergence of farming, 263–4, 403, 405–6; Great Pyramids, 403,407–8, 430; historical periods, 379–82; origins of state, 399–409, 414– 
18, 593–4n79 

Eliade, Mircea, 497–8 

Ellingson, Ter, 69–70, 71 

Engels, Friedrich, 47 

Enlightenment, the: coffee-houses, 473; emergence of, 29; as European‘civilizing’ process, 16–17; inﬂuence of indigenous peoples, 30–2, 45–6,441, 480–1, 482, 492; problems with, 494–5; and reasoned debate, 37–8,45; as response to indigenous critique, 62, 441 
Enlightenment philosophers, 349–50 
environmental determinism, 204–5 
Epic of Gilgamesh, 298, 305, 309 
epic poetry, 311–12 
equality, 46–8, 62, 73–6, 208, 422–6 
Erman, Adolf, 381 
Eshnunna, 575n56 
Eskimos, 191 
esoteric knowledge, 389, 390, 461, 472, 474–80, 490 
ethno-linguistic groups, 167–70 
ethnology, 554n6, 554n7 
ethno-mathematics, 295 
Etowah, Mississippi, 467, 469–70 
Eurasia, agricultural expansion, 255–6 
Europe, colonial expansion, 148–9, 154 
Evans, Arthur, 435, 437, 601n146, 601n148 
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 131–2 
evolutionism, 446–9, 454 
‘extreme’ individuals, 102–4 


factories, ﬁrst, 518 

family, origin of word, 510 

farming: in Amazonia, 267–71; beginnings of, 227–9, 244–5, 249–51, 273– 
5; and Çatalhöyük, 212–13, 223–4; in Central Europe, 259–62; deltaicenvironments, 286–7; early failures, 259–60, 259–62; ﬂood-retreatfarming, 235–6, 240, 563n40; in the Nile Valley, 263–4, 266–7; inOceania, 265–6; ‘play farming,’ 270–1, 293, 429, 460, 500; pre.domestication cultivation, 233–6; and seasonal variations, 223–4;theories of origins, 229–31, 247–8; and women, 236–41 

Feasts of the Dead, 463 

Federici, Silvia, 563–4n50 

female ﬁgurines, 83–4, 122, 213–14, 216, 220–1, 237, 242, 291, 294,540n11, 561n11 

Ferguson, Adam, 11, 61 

Fertile Crescent, 165, 225–9, 231, 236, 239, 241, 245, 248, 249, 251, 271,561–2n22/24, 570n54 

festivals, 116–18 
ﬁrst-order regimes, 391, 396, 398, 413, 507 

Fischer, Claude, 282 

Fleming, Daniel E., 575n61 

Flew, Antony, 152 

ﬂood myths, 299 

Flowery Wars (c. 1455–1519), 348 

folk egalitarianism, 34–5 

folk rituals, 120–1 

forager societies: in the Fertile Crescent, 226–9; ‘Golden Age’, 258–60;land management, 259; and land tenure, 152–4; and leisure, 136–40;Mesolithic, 262–3; mixed composition of, 122–5, 279–81; modern, 137;monumental architecture, 147; ‘optimal foraging theory’, 195–8; andproperty rights, 148–50; and slavery, 185–94; variations between, 139– 
40, 541n31 
see also 
hunter-gatherers 

Fort Ancient, 469, 476, 488, 607n61 

Fort Frontenac, 490–1 

Founding Fathers, 481 

France, 28, 36–44, 50–9, 63, 491, 512–13 

Frank, Robert, 201 

Frankfort, Henri, 582n11 

Franklin, Benjamin, 19–20 

Frazer, James, The Golden Bough, 396 

Frederick the Great, 394 

free will, 206 

freedom: and bureaucracy, 426–7; and communism, 47–8; and determinism,206–7; to disobey, 45, 426, 446, 482, 520; and equality, 44–5, 60, 62,130–2; European attitudes to, 17–18, 34, 66–7; formal and substantive,130–3, 547n12; and individual autonomy, 40–1, 61; Jesuit opposition to,43–4; to make commitments, 426–7; modern American attitudes to, 131;of movement, 396, 426, 446, 482, 520; in Native American societies, 20,30–1, 40–5, 61, 66, 130–1; origin of word, 187, 426; quintessential,609n3; and Roman law, 508–10; Rousseau on, 64; and slavery, 198–9; ofsocial relations, 398, 426, 482, 525; and sovereignty, 396–8; threeprimordial, 426–7, 432, 482, 503, 516, 520; Turgot on, 59–60; andwealth, 52; women’s, 501 

Freemasons, 68 

French Revolution, 37, 67–8, 69, 73 
Freud, Sigmund, 21, 215, 455 
Fukuyama, Francis, 9–10, 528n6 

Gage, Matilda Joslyn, 214–15 

Gayanashagowa (epic), 483–5, 486–7 

Geertz, Clifford, 16, 386, 591n46 

gender equality, 74 

Genesis, Book of, 236, 493 

geometric earthworks, 459, 475–6, 602n16 

Germany, Egyptologists, 381 

‘Giants’ Churches,’ Finland, 146–7, 157, 505, 550n34 

Gilgamesh see Epic of Gilgamesh
Gimbutas, Marija, 216–20, 248, 294, 560n7 

global warming, 257–8 

glottochronology, 167 

Göbekli Tepe (Neolithic site), 89–91, 104–5, 144, 226, 241, 242–4, 246,274, 564n54 

God’s Wife of Amun, 380 

Goldman, Irving, 556n35 

Goldschmidt, Walter, 177–9, 181, 200 

Gough, Kathleen, 131, 132 

Grafﬁgny, Madame de, 59, 60, 63, 373, 426–7, 535n43 

‘grain states’, 472, 547n7 

Great Pyramids, construction of, 407–8 

‘Great Sun’ of the Natchez, 156–7, 368, 392–6, 399, 551–2n49 

Greece: ancient palaces, 436–7; slavery, 575n50 

Grimaldi Cave burials, 103 

Gross, Otto, 215 

Grotius, Hugo, 12, 33 

Guaicurú people, 188, 190–1, 557n42 

Guatemala, 376 

gunpowder, Chinese invention of, 500 

Guzmán, Nuño Beltrán de, 583n18 

gynarchy (gynaecocracy), 219, 436 

Haddon, Alfred, 172 
Hadza people, 122, 128–9, 131, 137, 140, 158, 280, 447 
Haida people, 182, 208, 361 

Hajda, Yvonne P., 555n21 

hallucinogens, 389 

Hammurabi of Babylon, 298, 303, 360, 596n100 

Harappa, Punjab, 141, 142, 285, 314, 315, 318 

Harari, Yuval Noah, Sapiens, 92–3, 230–1, 504 

Harris, Mary, 600n140 

Harvey, David Allen, 533n11 

Hathor (goddess), 436 

Haudenosaunee, Five Nations of, 45, 46, 49, 455, 483, 487–9, 512, 533n5 

healers, travelling, 24 

Herakleopolis, 416 

Herodotus, 311 

‘heroic societies’, 312–13, 412, 445, 517 

Herxheim (Neolithic site), 260 

Hesiod, 236 

Hiawatha, 484 

Hierakonopolis, Egypt, 405 

hierarchy: and complex societies, 515; and equality, 208; in hunter-gatherer societies, 226; of knowledge, 365–6 

Hittites, 301 

Hobbes, Thomas, 2–3, 12, 13, 17, 21, 33, 118 

Hocart, A. M., 501 

Hodder, Ian, 560n5 

Holocene, 140, 156, 257–60, 271–2, 286 

Homer, Iliad, 312, 367 

Homo naledi, 81 

Homo sapiens, 83, 118–19 

Hopewell Interaction Sphere, 457–63, 475–6, 524, 602n16, 603n20,603n22, 603n23, 604n25 

Hopi people, 219 

human agency, 206 

human body, care of, in ancient Egypt, 403–6 

human prehistory, theories of, 78–82 

human rights, 552n53 

hunter-gatherers: burials, 14–15, 87–8, 102–4, 147, 186, 262–3; coastal,151, 154–5, 258–9, 263, 551n48; and leisure, 136–40; long-distance travel, 122–3, 173; monumental architecture, 89–92, 141–7; recent, 37,539n7; social experimentation, 4; studies of, 101; variations between,139–40, 541n31 
see also forager societies
Hupa people, 199 

‘Hymns of Gudea’, 300 

Iatmul people, Papua New Guinea, 566n65 

Ibn Fadlan, 288, 311 

Ibn Khaldun, 357 

Ice Age, 85, 91–2, 140 

Ihering, Rudolf von, 359–60, 362, 363, 364–5, 366, 368 

Illuminati, Order of the, 68, 71, 537n53, 537n54 

Inca Empire, 33, 59, 372–5, 406, 413, 423–5, 427, 599n133 

India, domestication of crops, 252 

‘Indian money’, 177–9 

indigenous critique of European culture, 5, 30–2, 37–40, 148, 441, 455,482, 492; European reaction to, 62, 95, 441–2 

individual liberty, 40–5, 48, 66–7, 130–1, 452, 492 

individualism, 48, 159 

individuals, anomalous, 102–4 

Indo-European languages, 167, 217, 218, 560–1n9 

Indus (river), 286 

Indus civilization, 313–21, 578n83, 579n92–94, 580n96–99 

inequality, 6–8, 34–5, 125, 151–2, 527n1; from below, 209 

information, control of, 364–5, 366, 391 

initiation rituals, 161–2, 365, 553n62 

International Monetary Fund (IMF), 368, 431 

Inuit, 107–8, 114, 115–16, 174–5 

Iroquoian-speaking peoples, 23–4, 38, 46, 47, 49, 191, 219, 455, 482–92,510–12 

Islam, 450 

Israelites, 301 

J. P. Morgan Chase, 431 
Jacobsen, Thorkild, 301, 304, 305, 576n62 
James, C. L. R., 302 
James I of England, 513–14 
Japan, prehistoric, 145–6, 157, 164, 549n33 
Jaspers, Karl, 450 
Jerf el-Ahmar (Neolithic site), 229, 236 
Jericho, 227, 236, 246 
Jesuit missionaries, 41–6, 61, 70–1, 392, 473, 487, 488, 492, 511, 534n22,
534n27 
Jesuit Relations of New France, 36, 40, 41–2, 43, 44, 455, 533n10, 534n19 
Jigonsaseh (Iroquoian Mother of Nations), 483–4, 489, 490–2 
Jomon period, Japan, 145–6, 505, 549n33 
Jones, Sir William, 167 
Jordan Valley, 227 
Judaism, 497 
Jung, Carl, 215 

kairos, 524 
Kalahari Bushmen (San), 101, 110, 128, 137, 138, 139, 447 
Kames, Lord, 61 
Kandiaronk (Huron-Wendat chief), 5, 48–56, 58, 66, 70, 95, 130, 148, 219,
455, 482, 483, 490, 537n50, 586n57 
Karahan Tepe (Neolithic site), 226 
Kardashian, Kim, 364–5 
Karelia, prehistoric burials, 147 
Karuk people, 199 
Kayapo people, 447 
Kelly, Raymond, 506 
Kelly, Robert L., 541n31 
khipu (quipu), 375, 423–4 
Kilianstädten (Neolithic site), 260, 261 
K’inich Yax K’uk Mo,’ 583n17 
kinship, in forager societies, 279–81 
Klamath people, 556n26 
Knossos, Crete, 434–5, 437, 499, 601n146 
knowledge hierarchies, 365–6, 419–20 
Körtik Tepe, 564–5n57 
Kostenki, Russia, 91 
Kotzebue, Otto von, 551n45 
Kroeber, Alfred, 199, 200, 379, 553n2, 589n32 
kurgans (burial mounds), 217, 289, 290 

Kwakiutl people, 108, 114, 115, 140, 160, 174, 179–80, 182–5, 204,555n18, 556n35 

La Flesche, Francis, 476, 478, 607n65 

Lagash (city-state), 300 

Lahontan (Louis-Armand de Lom d’Acre, Baron de la Hontan), Dialogues(1703), 49–56, 58, 70–1, 481, 482, 490–1, 533n11, 536n47, 538n57 

Lakota people, 108–10 

Lallemant, Father Jérôme, 41–2, 43, 44, 45, 130, 547n10 

land: colonial appropriation of, 149, 154; communal tenure, 250–1, 567n5;property rights in, 148–50, 550n37 

landed property, 363 

language: and authority, 547–8n15; and cultural groupings, 167–70 

Lapita horizon, 265–6, 267, 569n33, 569n36 

Late Neolithic, 420–2 

Le Guin, Ursula, 290 

Le Jeune, Father Paul, 41, 45 

Le Petit, Father Maturin, 392 

Leach, Edmund, 546n54 

Leacock, Eleanor, 130 

League of Five Nations, 483–4, 486–92 

Leakey, Louis and Mary, 137 

left-wing thought, 68–9 

Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 29, 30, 50, 536n47 

León, Juan Ponce de, 151 

Levantine Corridor, 227, 229, 236, 246, 249 

Lévi-Strauss, Claude, 21, 98–102, 106–7, 112, 118, 135–6, 140, 238, 239– 
40, 555n20, 586n1 

Liangchengzhen, China, 287 

Liguria, Italy, cave burial, 88 

Linear A script, 434 

Linear B script, 437 

‘Linear Pottery’ tradition, 261, 263, 266–7, 272 

‘Little Ice Age’, 258 

‘Little Old Men,’ of the Osage people, 478, 500, 607n65 

livestock, management of, 147, 222, 229, 264, 266, 272, 274, 404 
Livingstone, David, 592n62 
Locke, John, 12, 33, 40, 149, 550n37 
Louis XIV of France, 51, 392, 490 
Lowie, Robert, 108–10, 113, 114, 160, 520, 544–5n48, 544n47, 549n28 
low-level food production, 271, 568n19 
Lyth, Richard B., 430 

MacPherson, C. B., 159, 552n53 

Ma’dan, Iraq (Marsh Arabs), 573n40 

Maidenetske (‘mega-site’), 289, 290, 572n32 

Maidu people, 203, 204 

Maine, Henry Sumner, 250 

Maistre, Comte de, 495 

Malinowski, Bronislaw, 22–3 

Man the Hunter symposium (1966), 101, 548n18 

Mandan-Hidatsa people, 108 

Manetho, Aegyptiaca, 381 

Mann, Barbara Alice, 50, 533n10, 534n13, 535n30, 607–8n69 

Mann, Charles C., 346–7 

Mao Tse-tung, 364 

Maori, 312 

Mari (Tell Hariri), Syria, 303 

Marshalls (anthropologists), 101 

Martu people, Australia, 122, 280 

Marx, Karl, 21, 128, 189, 206 

Marxism, 360, 446 

Mashkan-shapir (city), 303 

Massim Islands, 23 

matriarchy, 561n10; modern claims for and against in Minoan Crete, 438–9;modern claims for and against in Neolithic societies, 213–20 

Maubert de Gouvest, Jean Henri, 535n43 

Mauss, Marcel, 107–8, 113, 173–5, 184, 432, 516, 543n43, 545n54 

Maxixcatzin, 353 

Maxtla (Tepanec ruler), 588n9 

May Day, 117 

Mayan city-states, 330, 333–6 

Mayan civilization: ball-courts, 384–5; Classic Maya period, 330, 333,377–8, 410, 411, 413, 468, 508; ‘Post-Classic,’ 378, 379–80; rebellion,376–8; writings, 589n23 

Mbuti Pygmies, 101, 110, 128 

Mead, Margaret, 529n17 

Melanesia, 266 

Memphis, Egypt, 411 

Mesoamerica, 143, 251, 258, 271, 285, 330–2, 358 

Mesolithic cultures, 123–4, 207, 262–3, 549–50n34 

Mesopotamia, 284, 297–304, 380, 409–11, 413, 421–3, 573n41, 574n44,574n48, 575n50, 575n54 

Mexica people, 328 

Mexico: ancient cities, 285–6; city-states, 584–5n48; cultivation of crops,271; Tenochtitlan, 328–9; Teotihuacan, 328–32; Tlaxcala, 346–58 

Mezhirich, Ukraine, 91, 543n38 

Mezin, Ukraine, 543n38 

Middle Paciﬁc period, burials, 186 

migrations, human, 170–1, 218 

Mi’kmaq people, 38, 72, 73, 148 

Mill, John Stuart, 134 

Millar, John, 11, 61 

Miller, Joaquin, 558n52 

Millon, René, 343 

Minangkabau people, 220 

mining, origins of, 500 

Minoan Crete, 434–9, 524, 601n146, 601n148 

Mississippian civilization, 452, 463–73, 488 

Mitchell, W. J. T., 78 

‘mitochondrial Eve’, 79–80 

Moche culture, 387, 399 

Moctezuma the Younger (Aztec ruler), 347, 370, 373, 582n16 

modern state, 366–9 

Mohawk Nation, 483 

Mohenjo-daro, India, 313–19, 323, 499 

Moldova, ‘mega-sites’, 289 

monarchy, 445, 501, 517–18, 565n60 

monotheism, 554n7 
Montagnais-Naskapi people, 38, 41, 130 

Montaigne, 536n47 

Monte Alban (Mesoamerican city), 330 

Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de, 58, 480–1, 537n50,538n62, 601n1 

monumental architecture: Amazonian, 270; in Chavín de Huántar, 386–90;Göbekli Tepe (monuments), 89–91; Hopewell earthworks, 458–63;mammoth structures (Upper Palaeolithic), 90–1; in Mayan culture,571n20; Mesoamerican, 287, 331, 340–2, 383; Native American, 141–5;Poverty Point earthworks, 141–5; recent discoveries of, 89–92;Stonehenge, 105–6 

Morgan, Lewis Henry, 11–12, 446 

Morris, Ian, 255, 527n1 

Motolinía (Toribio of Benavente), 586n62; Historia de los Indios (1541),350, 355–7 

Mound Key, Florida, 151 

Moundville, Mississippi, 467 

Moya de Contreras, Pedro, 351 

Müller, Johannes, 573n38 

Mumford, Lewis, 595n95 

mummiﬁcation, 404, 409 

Muskogee people, 458 

Mutesa (Ganda king), 592n62 

mutual aid, 47, 52, 67, 130–1, 273, 296, 421, 432, 482, 538n62 

Mycenae, 436–7 

myth, 78, 497–8; 525–6 

Myth of the Stupid Savage, 73, 92 

Nambikwara people, 98–102, 106–7, 110, 112, 267 

Naqada, Egypt, 405 

Narmer, King of Egypt, 404 

Natchez people, 156–7, 368, 391–6, 399, 447, 592n57, 593n69 

Native Americans: attitudes to individual liberty, 40–4, 452–4; clan systems, 456–7, 461, 463; communities, 20; critique of European culture,37–40, 48–56, 61–2, 66; debate and rhetorical powers, 45–6; andeccentricity, 96–7; forager societies, 150–4; inﬂuence on Enlightenmentthought, 30–2, 35–7, 473; inﬂuence on European settlers, 533n5; long.distance travel, 122–3; monumental earthworks, 141–5, 147; origins,154–5; political self-consciousness, 452–4; and property rights, 160;seasonal variations, 108–10; and sign language, 547n4; and slavery, 177 

Natuﬁan people, 246 

natural law theory, 12, 32–5 

Navajos, 155 

Neanderthals, 81, 83, 85 

Nebelivka (‘mega-site’), 289, 290, 292, 572n32 

Neitzel, Stu, 592–3n68 

neo-evolutionist theory, 446–8 

Neolithic era: in Africa, 403–6; in Britain, 105–7; burials, 594n82; ‘cultureareas,’ 124; female ﬁgurines, 220–1, 237, 294; Late Neolithic, 420–2;and matriarchy, 213–20; skull portraits, 246–7 

Neolithic farming: advent of, 211, 224–41, 244–5, 247–8, 259–62; inCentral Europe, 259–62, 272–3; crop diversity, 570n54; and deltas, 286– 
7; expansion, 254–7; Fertile Crescent, 225–9; in the Nile Valley, 263–4,266–7; in Oceania, 265–6; rejection, 105–6 

‘Neolithic Revolution’, 25, 138, 257, 548n21 

Nevali Çori (prehistoric settlement), 243 

‘New France’, missionary and travel accounts from, 36–44 

New Guinea, 252 

Newark Earthworks, Ohio, 459 

Newton, Isaac, 538n1 

Nietzsche, Friedrich, 118 

Nile, ﬂooding of, 406 

Nilotic peoples, 403–6, 594n84 

Nineveh, 297, 302 

Nippur, 302 

‘noble savage’, 38, 56, 69–73, 357 

nomarchs, Egyptian, 416–17, 597n114 

Nootka people, 182, 183 

Nostratic (language family), 167 

Nuer people, 97–8, 131–2, 365–6, 396, 403, 447, 542n33, 594n84 

Nussbaum, Martha, 547n12 

Nuttall, Zelia Maria Magdalena, 352 

Oceania, Neolithic farming in, 265–6 
Olmec culture, 332, 383–6, 391, 398, 507, 590n41, 591n46 
Ondegardo y Zárate, Juan Polo de, 373 
Oneida Nation, 483 
Onondaga Nation, 483 
optimal foraging theory, 195–8 
Osage people, 469, 476–81, 500, 538n62, 607n65–67 
Ostrom, Elinor, 566n2 
Otomí warriors, 354Ötzi (iceman), 14 
Ounotisaston (Attiwandaronk capital), 488 

Paine, Tom, 587n3 

Palaeolithic era, 14–15, 80, 83–4, 85, 91–2, 102–4, 104, 107, 125 

Palenque (Mesoamerican city), 330, 331 

Palestinian villages, 567n5 

Pandaram people, 128 

Panga ya Saidi, Kenya, 84 

Papua New Guinea, 124, 158, 265, 566n65 

Paris student protests (1968), 136 

Parker, Arthur, 607n69 

Pascoe, Bruce, 550n38 

Pasztory, Esther, 331–2, 583n32 

patriarchal household, 508, 509–10, 513, 520–1 

patriarchy, origins of, 521 

patrimonial system, 402 

Patterson, Orlando, 187, 509, 556n35 

peasantry, in ancient Egypt, 406 

Pericles, 306 

Peru: ancient cities, 287, 386; early agriculture in, 251; Inca Empire, 372–5,406–7; parallels with Egypt, 409 
see also Chavín de Huánar 

Philistines, 301 

Phoenicians, 301 

Pinker, Steven, 13–14, 16–19 

Pizarro, Francisco, 374, 376 

Plains Indians, 108–10, 114 

Planck, Max, 525 

Plaque of Ur-Nanshe, 299 
Plato, 210, 236 

Pleistocene age, 90, 140 

Pnyx (Athens), 306 

polis, 3 

political self-consciousness: among Amazonians, 112–13; among PaciﬁcCoast foragers, 203; among the Nambikwara, 100–2; and theEnlightenment, 495–6; human capacity for, 86–7, 93–6, 205–9; NativeAmerican, 480–3; in pre-Columbian America, 452; and seasonalvariations, 106–8, 115–18 

Polynesia, 266 

Pomo people, 203, 204 

Popol Vuh (Mayan epic), 384, 384–5 

population, human, in the Upper Palaeolithic, 540n17 

possessive individualism, 159 

Postgate, Nicholas, 575n56 

post-modernism, 442 

potlatch, 108, 182, 184–5, 201, 202, 204, 312 

Poverty Point earthworks, 141–5, 157, 164 

power see domination 

pre-agricultural societies, 164–5 

pre-domestication cultivation, 233–5 

primitive communism, 47, 128 

‘primitive democracy’, 301 

primitive trade, 22 

private property: in Native American societies, 179, 181; origins of, 161–3;and revolution, 68; Rousseau on, 64–7, 126–7 

property rights: Amazonian ideas of, 189–91; indigenous concept of, 158– 
63; in land, 148–50; in Roman Law, 161, 508–10; and sacred places,157–63, 502, 552n54; and the state, 362–5 

prophets, 97–8 

Prophets, Book of (Bible), 425 

‘proto-history’, 589n33 

public housing, in ancient cities, 342–4, 517 

Pylos, 436, 437 

Qustul, Nubia, 405 
Radin, Paul, 96–7, 108 

Ragueneau, Father, 455 

rainforest agriculture, 270 

Recollect missionaries, 39, 489, 534n15 

Renfrew, Colin, 434, 560–1n9 

revolutions, social, 326–7, 363–4, 546n55 

Rig Veda, 317 

right-wing thought, 69 

ritual killings, at royal burials, 399–403, 405, 412, 466 

ritual play, 501 

rituals, 116, 158, 161–3, 430, 545–6n54, 546n55 

rivers, and early cities, 286 

Rivers, W. H. R., 172 

Roman Law, 508–10, 520 

Romito cave burials, 14, 103 

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques: and accounts of Native Americans, 37, 536n49;Discourse on the Origin of Inequality (1754), 2, 27–8, 63–7, 528n6; andfatalism, 528n10; independence, 537n52; and left-wing thought, 17, 68– 
9, 494–5; and the ‘noble savage,’ 70–3; on popular festivals, 546n55; onprivate property, 64–7, 126–7, 360, 362; and progress, 537n55; andrevolution, 67–9; and the State of Nature, 11–12, 25, 357 

sacred places, and property rights, 157–63, 502, 552n54 
Sagard, Brother Gabriel, 39–40, 45 
Sahagún, Bernardino de, 337, 351 
Sahlins, Marshall, 58, 135–40, 180, 548n18, 548n23, 582n16 
San people see Kalahari Bushmen 
Sanday, Peggy R., 561n10 
Sannai Maruyama, Japan, 146, 157, 505, 549n33 
Santos-Granero, Fernando, 187, 188, 556n39, 556n41 
Sapa Inca (Inca ruler), 373–5 
‘sapient paradox,’ 84, 93 
Sargon the Great, 430 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 136 
sati (widow-suicide), 400 
Scandinavia: coastal foragers, 551n48; prehistoric burials, 147 
Scarry, Elaine, 505 
Scheidel, Walter, 528n6 

schismogenesis, 56–8, 180, 200, 207, 226, 245, 332, 445, 504, 530n22 

Schletz (Neolithic site), 260 

Schor, Juliet, 548n17 

Schultz, James Willard, 531n31 

Scott, James C., 444–5, 452, 460, 472, 547n7, 599–600n135, 600n137 

seasonal variations: and political self-consciousness, 116–18, 544–5n48,544n44; population densities, 542–3n38; of social structure, 102, 104–11,113–15, 224, 544–5n48, 545–6n54; and state formation, 429; andwarfare, 385, 428–9, 599n134 

second-order regimes, 413, 418, 468, 507 

Semang people, 126 

Seminole Nation, 472 

Sen, Amartya, 547n12 

Seneca Nation, 483 

Sennacherib (Assyrian Emperor), 302 

Shakespeare, William, 27 

Shang dynasty, China, 399, 401, 411–12, 413, 557n110 

Sherratt, Andrew, 563n40, 578n82 

Shigirskoe, Lake (prehistoric monuments), 274 

Shilluk people, 368, 396–8, 403, 404, 447 

Shimao, China, 325 

ships’ crews, and monumental architecture, 595n94–95 

sign language, 547n4 

skulls and skull portraits (Neolithic Fertile Crescent), 243–4, 246–7,566n65 

slave law, 509 

slave raiding, in forager societies, 182, 187–91, 204 

slavery, 559n70; abolished multiple times, 523; in Eurasia, 450; in Greece,575n50; in Native American societies, 177, 182, 185, 186–94, 197–200,203–4, 207–8, 555–60nn 

Smith, Adam, 11, 22, 61, 133, 441 

social complexity, 360–1 

social evolution, 5, 60–1, 110–11, 147, 247, 431 

social inequality, 6, 27–9, 30, 32, 34–5, 208–9 

social science, 495, 498, 525 

social theory, 21, 205–6, 418–19, 494–5, 523 
sortition, 117, 306, 367, 502 

sovereignty: in ancient Egypt, 399–409; undermining of in modern states,431; in the Inca Empire, 406, 409; Mayan, 410; and state formation, 403,409, 507; without the state, 391–8 

Spanish conquistadors, 32–3, 346, 348, 350–4 

Sparta, 76 

speculative philosophy, 450 

Spiro, Mississippi, 467 

sports, Mesoamerican, 330, 384–6, 465; and warfare, 468; see also 
ball 
games, chunkey
Spretnak, Charlene, 560n8 

St Johns River valley, Florida, 145 

state, the: and cereal cultivation, 448; and cities, 277; deﬁnitions of, 359– 
62, 587n4; ‘early states,’ 409–13; elements of, 507; modern, 366–9;origins of, 359–62, 368–70, 382–3, 427–31; and private property, 127,362–5; ‘theatre states,’ 386 

‘state formation’, 399–409, 418, 427–31, 439–40, 481 

State of Nature, 2–3, 11–12, 15, 33–4, 46–7 

steam engine, Greek invention of, 500 

Steiner, Franz, 519–21 

Stonehenge, 105–6, 125, 543n40 

‘stranger-kings’, 333–6, 582–3n16 

Strehlow, T. G. H., 162 

string-based counting techniques, 375, 423–4, 424, 599n127 

Sumerians, 298, 299, 307–8, 517–18 

Sunghir, Russia, 87–8, 102 

surplus, 128, 129, 156, 361, 428, 448, 460 

Susa, Iran, 298 

tabu, 159 

Talheim (Neolithic site), 260 

Taljanky (‘mega-site’), 289, 291, 572n32 

Tambiah, Stanley, 597n110 

Taosi, China, 325–6 

Taurus Mountains, 241, 309 

taxation, 59, 149, 271, 299–300, 302, 372, 381, 423–6, 437, 444, 547n7,584–5n48, 588n10, see also corvée 
technological innovation, 498–501 
Tell Aswad, 236 
Tell Brak, 573n41 
Tell Qarassa, 246 
Tell Sabi Abyad, 420–2, 598n119 
Temps modernes, Les (journal), 136 
Tenochtitlan, Mexico, 285, 328–9, 347–8, 358, 370–1, 376, 385 
Teotihuacan, Mexico, 285, 286, 328–45, 358, 499, 517, 581–2n6, 582n7,
582n8, 583n23, 590–1n44 
terminology, for historical periods, 379–82 
Testart, Alan, 566n65 
Tetimpa, Mexico, 337 
Thebes, 380, 411, 416 
Thomas, Keith, 542n32 
Tigris (river), 286 
Tikal (Mesoamerican city), 330, 331, 333–6 
time, units of, 307 
Tiryns, 436 
Tiwanaku culture, 386 
Tlaxcala, Mexico, 346–58, 499, 585n55, 586n59 
Tlingit people, 208, 361, 559n61 
tobacco, 473 
Tolkien, J. R. R., 311 
Tolowa people, 199 
Toltec people, 335, 345, 581n3 
Tooker, Elizabeth, 456–7 
Torres Straits expedition (1898), 172 
totemic systems, 161 
trade, prehistoric, 22–3, 227, 531n33 
Transcaucasian culture (Kura-Araxes), 578n82 
Trautmann, Thomas, 539n2 
Trouillot, Michel-Rolph, 153 
Tsimshian people, 182 
Tsouharissen (Attwandaronk chief), 489–90 
Tula (Mesoamerican city), 330, 335, 345 
Tully, James, 149 
Tupi people, 112 

Turgot, A. R. J., 59–61, 62, 63, 66, 67, 75, 101, 133, 441, 446, 454, 536n45,548n16 

Turnbull, Colin, 101 

Turner, Victor, 546n54 

Turner Site, Ohio, 462 

Tylor, E. B., 554n9 

‘Ubaid period, 422, 462, 598n124 
Ukrainian ‘mega-sites,’ 288–97, 322, 572n25, 572n29, 572n32, 572n34 
Upper Palaeolithic, 83–4, 85, 122, 123, 501, 540n17 
Ur, Royal Tombs of, 298, 399, 400 
urban life, Mesopotamian, 307–10, 322 
urban republics, ancient, 332–3, 357–8 
urbanization: and agriculture, 287;and ‘heroic societies,’ 312–13, see also cities 
Urkesh (Tell Mozan), 304 
Uruk, Mesopotamia, 141, 142, 291, 304–10, 361, 380, 576n65, 576n66 
Uruk Vase, 308–9, 577n73 
Ussher, James, Archbishop of Armagh, 538n1 

Valero, Helena, 18–19, 21, 110, 119 

value systems, 126 

Varna cemetry, Bulgaria, 288 

violence: and care, 191, 513–14, 517–21; in France, 513; in Neolithicsocieties, 242–4, 260–2, 564–5n57, 566n65; and the state, 359–60, 363– 
5, 366, 508, 593–4n79, 593n78; in Wendat culture, 510–14 

Voltaire, 16, 17, 40, 58 

wampum, 43, 177–8 

warfare: and captivity, 188, 204, 208, 341, 400, 411, 457, 487; and socialevolution, 16, 428–9, 504–12; Amazonian, 15–16, 188–91, 530n21; inancient China, 325–6, 400, 412; representation in ancient Egypt, 414,417; in Indus civilization, 580n96; in Mesoamerica, 370–1, 385,599n134; in Mesopotamia, 599n134; in Native North America, 109, 118,145, 151, 154, 186–7, 192, 197, 203, 464, 468–9, 479–80, 487–9,549n32, 559n73, 609–10n12; in Neolithic societies, 249, 261–3; see also ‘capturing societies’, ‘heroic societies’ 
Wari culture, 386, 399 

warrior aristocracy, 311, see also ‘heroic societies’ 

Weber, Max, 359, 366, 394, 402, 587n1, 587n7; The Protestant Ethic (1905), 178–9, 206 

Weishaupt, Adam, 68 

Wendat (Huron): and authority, 547n10; and farming, 38; and freedom,130–1, 492; Jesuit accounts of, 41–6; Ondinnonk, 454–5; and politicalself-consciousness, 95; and reasoned debate, 39–40; and trade, 531n33;and violence, 510–14; Wendat Confederacy, 51, 483, 488–9, 533n13;women in, 219 

Western civilization, 17–18, 29, 548n16 

wheat and barley, domestication of, 231–3 

Wilde, Oscar, 20 

Williams, Eric, 595n95 

Wills, John, 575n54 

Winnebago people, 96–7 

Wintu people, 203 

Wissler, Clark, 171–2, 555n17 

witchcraft, 485–6, 563–4n50, 607–8n69 

‘Wogie,’ 192–4, 200 

Wolff, Christian, 532n3 

women: in Aztec society, 370–1; and civilization, 432–4; degradation of,518–19; and early farming, 214, 236–41, 248; and gambling, 24; and theGardens of Adonis, 210–11; in Inca society, 374–5; and innovation, 499– 
501; in Mayan society, 377, 387; in Mesopotamia, 574–5n49; in Minoanculture, 434–9; Native American, 43–4; in Nuer society, 132, 594n84;sexual freedom, 44, 132, 533n10; in Thebes, 380–1 

Woodburn, James, 128–30, 158 

Woolley, Leonard, 298 

work hours, increase in, 133–5, 548n17 

World Economic Forum, 7 

World Trade Organization (WTO), 368, 431 

writing: and bureaucracy, 306–7, 316, 419; see also cuneiform script 

Xicotencatl, Antonio, 355 
Xicotencatl the Elder, 352, 353, 585n55 
Xicotencatl the Younger, 352–3, 354, 585n54, 586n56 
Yamasee War (1715), 471 
Yanomami people, 15–16, 19, 21, 110, 119, 269, 529n18, 529n19, 530n25 
Yaowangcheng, China, 287 
Yaxchilán (Mayan city), 385 
Yellow River, 286, 287 
Yucatán Peninsula, 333, 335, 376 
Yudinovo, Russia, 91 
Yuletide Kings, 117–18 
Yurok people, 177, 179, 181, 183–5, 194, 199–204, 555n18, 556n29 

Zagros Mountains, 241, 309 
Zapatista movement, 376–7 
Zimri-Lim, 303–4 
Zoroaster, 450 
Zuñi people, 219 



THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING 
Find us online and join the conversationFollow us on Twitter twitter.com/penguinukbooks 
Like us on Facebook facebook.com/penguinbooksShare the love on Instagram instagram.com/penguinukbooksWatch our authors on YouTube youtube.com/penguinbooksPin Penguin books to your Pinterest pinterest.com/penguinukbooksListen to audiobook clips at soundcloud.com/penguin-books 

Find out more about the author and discover your next read at penguin.co.uk 

PENGUIN BOOKS 
UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | AustraliaNew Zealand | India | South Africa 
Penguin Books is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies whoseaddresses can be found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com. 

First published in Great Britain by Allen Lane 2021 
Copyright © David Graeber and David Wengrow, 2021 
The moral right of the author has been asserted 
Cover: based on a design by Thomas Colligan 
ISBN: 978-0-241-40245-0 
This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred,distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except asspeciﬁcally permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms andconditions under which it was purchased or as strictly permitted by applicablecopyright law. Any unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a directinfringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights and those responsible may be liablein law accordingly. 

