THE army is the ultimate weapon
available to the State to enforce the
nation's will. When diplomats fail
to preserve the peace, the soldier
has to go to war to re-establish
peace. And when the civil administrat10n
fails to preserve order, the
soldier is called upon to restore
order. As the nation's final safeguard,
the army must not fail in
either circumstance.
The main task of the army is to
deal with the external enemy and not
internal challenges. lts primary role
is to defend national sovereignty
against external aggression. In its
secondary role, it is required to aid
the civil power when called upon to
do so. Modern wars have become
very complex and modern equipment
highly sophisticated. The army
bas little time to spare from preparing
for its primary role to undertake
tasks connected with its secondary
role. And yet these secondary tasks
have to be undertaken in the
national interest.
However, certain guidelines connected
with carrying out these tasks
need to be emphasised. These should
not unduly impinge upon its ability
to carry out its primary role. The
army should not undertake these
tasks of its own volition but only
when called upon to do so by the
civil authorities. The latter should
summon army assistance only when
they are not able to cope with a
situation with their not inconsiderable
resources In other words,
the use of the army in its secondary
role should be more ·an exception
tlian the rule. Yet, during the period
1951 to 1970, the army had to be
called out 'in aid of the civil power
on no less than 476 occasions and
during • the last· ten -years on. 369
occasions.
There are di.fferent types of ta~ks
connected with aid·to the civil power.
The~e ma:Y be divided-into five cat~gories
- counter insurgency operations,
restoration of law and order,
maintenance of essential services,
assistance during natural calamities
and . developrne-nt tasks. Our army
has been involved in each of these
q1t,egori_eosf aid.
. C9unter insurgency operations
imply dealing with armed insurrection
by the people against the State.
Colonial or neo-colonial powers
may get involved in such operations
in a foreign country; countries hke
India with no expansionist designs
may haye to undertake such operations
against .a segment of their
own people. Indeed, the Indian
Army has been conducting counter
insurgency operations for prolonged
pcfriods in Nagaland, Mizoramand
Manipur. And today Punjab
appears to have joined them. •
In his book on the History of
Warfare, Field Marshall Montgo-·
mery· brackets insurrection with war.
Nqtwithstanding this, there are
fundamental differences between
war and counter insurgency operations
'Particularly when -the latter
is being conducted against a segment
of one's own people. Wars are
fought against a State with the aim
of achieving victory by force of
arms and imposing the will of one
S_tate over the enemy Stat~.
: <:::ount~irn surgency operations, on
the other harid, are conducted
a_gainst a people who do not constitrite'a
State in the-recognised sense
and the aim is to win their hearts
and minds through combined political
and administrative action. All
armed elements of ''the State-the
army, the para milifary forces and
the .. police_:_should .function under
military 'command, which should
nave -a say in the -coordination of
the'. ciVIl • adm ini.stration with military
operations-. Yet at the ap~x. <_>f
the administration, authority must
rest with a civilian head of the
government, who should formulate
policy and should not unduly inter·
fere in military operations.
Military action need not be unduly
inhibited by considerations of
minimum force, • although devast- •
ating use of military force as in
war, should be avoided. These
operatio~~ are generally long drawn
out affajts. They lasted for over 30
years in , Vietnam. Our own experience,
though different in intensity
and scenario, has been similar.
We have been so involved for nearly
30 years in Nagaland and for nearly
20 years in Mizoram.
Restoration of law and order is
the most common type of aid that
the army provides to the civil admi-nistration.
When violence erupts
and is beyond the control of the
police and the para military forces,
army assistance is sought. The legal
position is .that any Magistrate
can summon --military assistance
when he finds that public security
is manifest1y epdangered. Normally,
requests ffor military assistance are
cleared by the State Government
concerned· . .- The civil authorities
remain in· fuU contr◊l of'the administration
aqd they request the army
to carry out certain specific. tasks
like dispersaf of unlawful assembly
or enforcement of curfew and so
on, which in the given circumstance,
is beyond the capability of the
resomces available to them. While .
functioning in this role, the army
does not come under any magistrate
or State Government. It has
complete freedom to carry out its
t.~~k in the manner it thinks best. •
'''However, army action has to· be
guided by the four principles of
necessity, minimum force, impartiality
and good faith. 1 here must
be a necessity for every action that
the army takes. Necessity gets
established when its assistance is
called for but while dealing with a
specific situation, no attempt should
qe made at any reprisal or to terrorise
anyone. The principle of mini~
mum force requires that only the
barest amount of force in relation
to the requirements of the situation,
be used. This is something relative
and its quantum- is determined bf
the nature of opposition 'tha( 'is'
likely to be encountered. The prfnti-.
ple. of impartiality is self-evident.,
It is a very important considerati6n,'
governing army action during· com:'..'
munal riots. Lastly, the principl¢'
of good faith gets automatically
• satisfied if the three other principles
are complied with. -• -:
,,
It is important that troops not.
only act correctly but are seen to:
be acting correctly. The opposing,
crowd should never be referred- to,
as enemy, religious susceptibilities
must never be hurt and the , dead
and injured as a result of army
action must be duly att~nded to,.
It may be recalled that at Jalianwalabagh,
that infamous . officer,
Brigadier Dyer, grossly violated all
these four principles. . , : ,
Maintenance of essential services
implies the utilisation of technical
and oth·er manpower of the army,.
during a strike. The law provides
that the democratic right to strike
by the workers be safeguarded., How.,:
ever, when a strike has been·declared·.
illegal and the government has· by
ordinance announced that a parti-cular
service, where a strike has·
taken place, is vital for the well-be-~
ing of the community, trnops can beused
for running that service. While'
so employed, troops are requjred to.
use their technical skill or nianual,
power and not their weapons. The
police is required to deal •with any
resultant law and order situation.
If the situation goes beyond their,
control, army assistance may ;be._
taken to restore order.
Assistance during calamities like
floods, earthquake, drought, fire andso
on is also to be provided, when;
required. The army, with its organised
and disciplined functioning, ~s
also its technical skill and equip~
ment, can be of great help. The air
force c_an also be of considerable
help by, -dropping food-packets, res-.
cuing marooned people and so on. • '
The army can also render assistance
in development i-,rojects. Ear-''
lier, army engineers constructed the'
Godaveri barrage and more recentlyfor
our first multi-purpose scheme,'
the Damodar Valley Project, survey
for the seven dams, clearance of
31
32
sites and iaying of approach routes
were carried out by the army. Eco•
logical battalions are now being
raised as part of the Territorial
Army to prevent deforestation and
undertake afforestation tasks. In
1962, one of our famous divisions
with an enviable fighting record bad
been extensively used for non-military
tasks like construction of
accommodation. Soon after, it had
to face the Chinese in NEF A. This
division crumbled against Chinese
onslaughts. Ever since then, there is
understandable reluctance on the
part of the army to undert~ke tasks
which may adversely affect its operational
preparedness.
The scope and spectrum of the
army's aid to the civil power is
very wide. This does not mean that
the civil administration should
begin to lean heavily on the army.
Frequent use of the army in aid to
the civil power can become counter
productive. It may not only impinge
upon the army's ability to carry out
its primary but may even damage
its apolitical traditions.
Counter insurgency operations in
one's own country or restoration of
law and order are distasteful tasks
for a soldier as they involve operat·
ing against one's own nationals.
Yet, these tasks have to be undertaken
in the interest of national
security. However, it is necessary
that the frequency and duration of
these tasks should be as little as possible.
The civil government has a
large police force and an ever grow·
ing para-military force. The strength
of the latter is now well over half a
million. Thus, through efficient
management by tl:e civil administration,
occasions when the army's
assistance is required should be rare.
Unfortunately, army aid 1s being
summoned far more frequently than
it used to be in the British era, despite
greater militarisation of the
police and the phenomenal growth
of the para-military forces.
The two main reasons why army
assistance is called for so frequently
are increasing violence in our society
and the increasing politicisation of
the police. This has been as a result
of constant interference in the police
administration by politicians and
their unabashedly using the police
to serve their politicai and personal
ends. All thi's has led to the demora·
lisation of the police and to increasing
corruption in their ranks. In
many places, a nexus has been established
lretween the politician, the
criminal and the police. In the circumstance,
is it any wonder that our
police has become so ineffective in
dealing with crisis situations and the
government has to fall back repeatedly
upnn • the army to restore
order?
we need to take stock of the dangers
inherent in the frequent use of
the army for this role. First, troops
employed on these duties lose on
training time and this can adversely
affect their operational preparedness.
In 1947, one of the factors that
may have weighed with the Pakistan
General Staff was the fact that at
that time the Indian Army was
heavily embroiled in dealing with
Partition riots'in North India, and
Pakistan may have felt that it
could conquer Kashmir with the
help of tribal raiders.
Secondly, frequent use of the
army in this role er9des its deterrent
effect and, in the process, the army
may be forced to use greater force
than it would have otherwise done.
It is interesting that in 1946, Field
Marshal Auchinleck felt that there
may be growing violence in the
country and the Indian Army would
be increasingly called out to combat
it. He therefore decided that the
army should not revert to its prewar
khaki uniform and continue
with its olive green, which had been
introduceJ for operations in the
jungles of Burma. His rationale was
that having a uniform of a different
colour tlun the police, the soldier
would be-easily distinguishable and
this would have a better deterrent
effect. Larer events were to prove
the wisdom of this decision.
Thirdly, through prolonged and
frequent deployment on such duties,
the strong bond of discipline in the
army may weaken after some time
as it has done in the case of the
police. Moreover, in certain circumstances,
the stress and strain of
such duties may even erode the
loyalty of some troops. Under the
strain of widespread communal
violence in Punjab during the
Partition riots, the discipline of the
then undivided Indian Army began
to crack. The experiment of the
Punjab Boundary Force comprising
elements of the old undivided Indian
Army including those earmarked
for the new Indian Army and the
new Pakistan Army, bad to be given·
up in September 1947.
More recently, the mutiny of
some Sikh troops in June 1984 was
a painful reminder of what can
happen if troops are used for sensitive
tasks, without adequate
measures taken to educate those
likely to be affected. This mutiny
also emphasised the need for prior
steps being taken to prevent or
contain such untoward incidents.
Like all other mutinies, the mutiny
of Sikh troops was essentially due
to failure of command. However, if
troops are frequently used for such
tasks, the risk of such failures gets
accentuated.
Lastly, troops are called in only
when the civil administration bas
failed in carrying out its task.
Frequent failures like this will erode
the moral authority of the government
and the soldier may begin to
lose confidence or even respect for
the civil authorities. It may give
him wrong ideas and a feeling that
only the army can keep the civil
administration going. He may. even
be tempted to take over the administration.
Such a development will
destroy the apolitical complexion of
the army, which we cherish so
dearly, as also destroy our democratic
polity.
The Indian Army is the only·
apolitical army of the Third World
and has been an island of discipline
in a growing sea of indiscipline. It
has repeatedly proved itself a great
asset to the nation. Today, all our
institutions are being systematically
eroded and mutilated by the forces
of evil, like political manipulations,
unabashed sycophancy, rampant
corruption and debasement of
values. Our army is one of the very
few institutions which has relatively
been much less affected. Let us· not
through its frequent and prolonged
use in maintenance oflaw and order,
damage its high professional
standard and its deep apolitical
roots.
